arXiv:2504.16693v1  [cs.LG]  23 Apr 2025PIN-WM: Learning Physics-INformed World Models
for Non-Prehensile Manipulation
Wenxuan Li1,∗Hang Zhao2,∗Zhiyuan Yu2Yu Du1Qin Zou2,4Ruizhen Hu3,†Kai Xu1,†
1National University of Defense Technology2Wuhan University
3Shenzhen University4Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy
∗Equal contributions†Corresponding author
Project page: https://pinwm.github.io
Abstract —While non-prehensile manipulation (e.g., controlled
pushing/poking) constitutes a foundational robotic skill, its learn-
ing remains challenging due to the high sensitivity to complex
physical interactions involving friction and restitution. To achieve
robust policy learning and generalization, we opt to learn a
world model of the 3D rigid body dynamics involved in non-
prehensile manipulations and use it for model-based reinforce-
ment learning. We propose PIN-WM, a Physics-INformed World
Model that enables efficient end-to-end identification of a 3D
rigid body dynamical system from visual observations. Adopting
differentiable physics simulation, PIN-WM can be learned with
only few-shot and task-agnostic physical interaction trajectories.
Further, PIN-WM is learned with observational loss induced
by Gaussian Splatting without needing state estimation. To
bridge Sim2Real gaps, we turn the learned PIN-WM into a
group of Digital Cousins via physics-aware randomizations which
perturb physics and rendering parameters to generate diverse
and meaningful variations of the PIN-WM. Extensive evaluations
on both simulation and real-world tests demonstrate that PIN-
WM, enhanced with physics-aware digital cousins, facilitates
learning robust non-prehensile manipulation skills with Sim2Real
transfer, surpassing the Real2Sim2Real state-of-the-arts.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Non-prehensile robotic manipulation [50, 23, 86], which in-
volves moving an object by pushing or poking, finds extensive
applications in many real-world scenarios where grasping is
infeasible due to the weight, size, shape, or fragility of the
object, among others. Robotic push can be implemented with
simpler end effectors, making systems more cost-effective and
easier to deploy in certain environments [18, 67]. However,
significant challenges arise from the difficulty of fully dictating
the motion and pose of the object being pushed. The complex
underlying dynamics, caused by factors such as friction,
restitution, and inertia, make motion prediction difficult and
complicate motion planning and control.
Some studies tackle non-prehensile manipulation with im-
itation learning [11, 77], where the reliance on expensive
expert demonstrations limits their scalability. Others explore
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) [69], leveraging trial-and-
error in simulations to learn policies [39, 80]. However, the
discrepancy between simulation and reality hinders the transfer
of the learned policy to real-world environments [12, 45]. A
promising alternative is to learn world models [25] of the
environment dynamics in a data-driven manner, which can be
used for predictive control or employed in model-based RL
𝝎∗+𝜹𝟏
𝝎∗+𝜹𝟐(a) Few -shot task -agnostic data collection  for world model learning
(c)  Sim2Real policy transfer (b) Physics -aware digital cousins
𝒂𝒕
Fig. 1: PIN-WM is learned from few-shot and task-agnostic physical
interaction trajectories (random pushes of the blocks in this example),
through end-to-end differentiable identification of 3D physics param-
eters essential to the push operation (a). The learned PIN-WM is then
turned into a group of digital cousins via physics-aware perturbations
(b). The resulting world models are then used to learn the task-specific
policies with Sim2Real transferability (c).
for better data-efficiency and Sim2Real generality [26, 28].
However, purely data-driven world models rely heavily on the
quantity and quality of training data and struggle to generalize
to out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios [79].
It is well-recognized that incorporating structured priors into
learning algorithms improves generalization with limited train-
ing examples [63]. A number of studies [53, 5, 67] have sought
to integrate principles of physics into the development of world
models. In doing so, two critical aspects require particular
consideration. The first is the differentiability of the physics
parameter identification process . ASID [53] identifies physics
parameters for an established simulator using gradient-free
optimization [65]. Baumeister et al. [5] adopt a similar method
to learn dynamics for model predictive control (MPC) [73].
The absence of gradient feedback renders these methodologies
critically dependent on data quality. However, collecting high-
quality real-world trajectories itself is a challenging task [53].
Song and Boularias [67] employ a differentiable 2D physics
simulator for learning planar sliding dynamics. However, 2D
physics is insufficient to capture complex motions such as
flipping an object through poking. The second consideration
lies in the necessity of state estimation in the optimization
of world models. While most existing methods involve state
estimation with additional modules [53, 5, 67], the recent
advances in differentiable rendering [42, 75, 57] make it
possible to optimize against an observational loss directly, thus
saving the effort on state estimation.
We introduce PIN-WM , aPhysics- INformed World Model
that allows end-to-end identification of a 3D rigid body
dynamical system from visual observations. First , PIN-WM
is a differentiable approach to the identification of 3D physics
parameters, requiring only few-shot and task-agnostic physical
interaction trajectories. Our method systematically identifies
critical dynamics parameters essential to non-prehensile ma-
nipulation, encompassing inertial properties, frictional coeffi-
cients, and restitution characteristics [67, 53, 21]. Second , PIN-
WM learns physics parameters by optimizing the rendering
loss [56] induced by the 3D Gaussian Splatting [34] scene
representation, facilitating direct learning from RGB images
without additional state estimation modules. Consequently, the
learned world model, with identified physics and rendering
properties, can be readily applied to train vision-based control
policies of non-prehensile manipulation using RL.
The learned PIN-WM, representing a digital twin [24] of the
real-world rigid body system, may still exhibit discrepancies
against reality due to the inaccurate and partial observa-
tions [43]. To bridge the Sim2Real gap, we turn the identi-
fied digital twin into plenty of digital cousins [15] through
physics-aware perturbations which perturb the physics and
rendering parameters around the identified values as means.
Such purposeful randomization creates a group of physics-
aware digital cousins obeying physics laws while introducing
adequate varieties accounting for the unmodeled discrepancies.
The resulting world model group allows learning robust non-
prehensile manipulation policies with Sim2Real transferability.
Through extensive evaluation across diverse task scenarios,
we demonstrate that PIN-WM is fast-to-learn and accurate,
making it useful in learning robust non-prehensile manipu-
lation skills with strong Sim2Real transfer. The overall per-
formance surpasses the recent Real2Sim2Real state-of-the-
arts [67, 53, 45] significantly. Our real-world experiments
further showcase that PIN-WM facilitates Sim2Real policy
transfer without real-world fine-tuning and achieves high
success rates of 75% and65% in the Push and Flip tasks,
respectively. Our contributions include:
•We propose PIN-WM for accurate and efficient identifica-
tion of world models of 3D rigid body dynamical systems
from visual observations in an end-to-end fashion.
•We turn the identified digital twin into a group of physics-
aware digital cousins through perturbing the physics and
rendering parameters around the identified mean values,
to support learning non-prehensile manipulation skills
with robust Sim2Real transfer.
•We conduct real robot implementation to demonstrate that
our approach enables learning control policies with min-
imal task-agnostic interaction data and attains high per-
formance Real2Sim2Real without real-world fine-tuning.II. R ELATED WORK
A. Non-Prehensile Manipulation
Non-prehensile manipulation [50, 23, 86] refers to con-
trolling objects without fully grasping them. While offering
flexibility, its motions are highly sensitive to contact configura-
tions [78], requiring accurate dynamic descriptions and control
policies. Mason [50] presents a theoretical framework for
pushing mechanics and derive the planning by predicting the
rotation and translation of an object pushed by a point contact.
Akella and Mason [3] use a theoretical guaranteed linear
programming algorithm to solve pose transitions and generate
open-loop push plans without sensing requirements. Dogar
and Srinivasa [17] adopt an action library and combinatorial
search inspired by human strategies. The library can rearrange
cluttered environments using actions such as pushing, sliding,
and sweeping. Zhou et al. [85] model pushing mechanisms
use sticking contact and an ellipsoid approximation of the
limit surface, enabling path planning by transforming sticking
contact constraints into curvature constraints. These methods,
however, rely on simplified assumptions, either known physics
parameters or idealized physical models, which are often
violated in practice [60].
Deep learning methods have recently been applied to train
non-prehensile policies. Some studies focus on imitation learn-
ing [35], which mimics expert behavior for specific tasks.
Young et al. [77] emphasize the importance of diverse demon-
stration data for generalizing non-prehensile manipulation
tasks, introducing an efficient visual imitation interface that
achieves high success rates in real-world robotic pushing.
Chi et al. [11] utilize diffusion models’ multimodal action
distribution capabilities [32] to imitate pushing T-shaped ob-
jects, demonstrating impressive robustness. While effective,
imitation learning relies heavily on the quantity of real-world
data. Otherwise, it is prone to state-action distribution shifts
during sequential decision-making [6], which is a critical issue
in non-prehensile tasks requiring precise contact point selec-
tion and control [86]. Hu et al. [33] conclude that imitation
generalization follows a scaling law [41] with the number of
environments and objects, recommending 50 demonstrations
per environment-object pair. Such data requirements can be
costly and prohibitive for scalability. Alternatively, deep rein-
forcement learning (DRL) can learn policies through trial and
error in simulated environments [39, 80]. However, the large
gap between simulation and reality poses significant chal-
lenges for transferring these policies to the real world [12, 45].
Building an interactive model that accurately captures real-
world physical laws is crucial for learning feasible non-
prehensile manipulation policies in real world.
B. World Models for Policy Learning
World models [25], which learn the environment dynamics
in a data-driven manner, provide interactive environments for
effective policy training [26, 28]. Hafner et al. [26] pro-
pose Dreamer, a world model that learns a compact latent
representation of the environment dynamics. The following
work [74] applies Dreamer to robotic manipulation tasks,
demonstrating fast policy learning on physical robots. DINO-
WM [84] leverages spatial patch features pre-trained with
DINOv2 to learn a world model and achieve task-agnostic be-
havior planning by treating goal features as prediction targets.
TD-MPC [28, 29] uses a task-oriented latent dynamics model
for local trajectory optimization and a learned terminal value
function for long-term return estimation, achieving superiority
on image-based control. Building on the success of learning
from large-scale datasets [7, 61], Mendonca et al. [54] leverage
internet-scale video data to learn a human-centric action space
grounded world model. However, purely data-driven world
models rely heavily on the quantity and quality of training
data and struggle to generalize to out-of-distribution (OOD)
scenarios [79, 62]. This lowers the robustness of the learned
policies transferred to the real world.
Incorporating structured priors into learning algorithms
is known to improve generalization with limited training
data [63, 8]. Recent advances in differentiable physics have
opened up new possibilities for incorporating physical knowl-
edge into world models. Lutter et al. [48] introduce a deep
network framework based on Lagrangian mechanics, effi-
ciently learning equations of motion while ensuring physi-
cal plausibility. Heiden et al. [31] augment a differentiable
rigid-body physics engine with neural networks to capture
nonlinear relationships between dynamic quantities. Other
works [16] demonstrate analytical backpropagation through
a physical simulator defined via a linear complementarity
problem. ∇Sim [59] combine differentiable physics [16, 68]
and rendering [9, 37, 38, 76] to jointly model scene dynamics
and image formation, enabling backpropagation from video
pixels to physical attributes. This approach was soon followed
by improvements with advanced rendering techniques [46, 8],
or enhanced physics engines [40].
Despite those advances, only a few studies [53, 5, 67] incor-
porate physical property estimation into world models for non-
prehensile manipulation, relying on gradient-free optimization
or simplified physical models that fail to effectively handle
complex interactions. Gradient-free methods rely on high-
quality trajectories for system identification; lacking such data,
they are prone to local optima, as demonstrated by ASID using
CEM [53]. Simplified physics models, such as the 2D physics
engine adopted by Song and Boularias [67], inherently struggle
to capture the full 3D dynamics of real-world interactions,
leading to inaccurate predictions. In contrast, PIN-WM enables
end-to-end identification of 3D rigid-body dynamics from
visual observations using few-shot, task-agnostic interaction
data, which facilitates the training of vision-based manipu-
lation policies with RL. PIN-WM aligns with the original,
narrow-scope definition of a world model [25]: a dynamics
model tailored to a specific environment for precise model-
based control. This contrasts with general-purpose world foun-
dation models like Cosmos [2].C. Domain Randomization
Domain Randomization trains a single policy across a range
of environment parameters to achieve robust performance
during testing. Peng et al. [60] enhance policy adaptability to
varying environmental dynamics by randomizing the environ-
ment’s dynamic parameters. Miki et al. [55] train legged robots
in diverse simulated physical environments. During testing, the
robots first probe the terrain through physical contact, then pre-
emptively plan and adapt their gait, resulting in high robustness
and speed. Tobin et al. [71] introduce randomized rendering,
e.g., textures, lighting, and backgrounds, in simulated envi-
ronments to enhance real-world visual detection. Yue et al.
[81] randomize synthetic images using real image styles from
auxiliary datasets to learn domain-invariant representations.
Dai et al. [15] introduce an automated pipeline to transform
real-world scenes into diverse, interactive digital cousin envi-
ronments, demonstrating significantly higher transfer success
rates compared to digital twins [24].
While these randomization methods provide a simple ap-
proach for efficiently transferring simulation-trained policies
to the real world, their uniform sampling of environment
parameters lacks proper constraints. This results in a generated
space far larger than the real-world space, increasing learn-
ing burdens [52] and often producing conservative policies
with degraded performance [19]. In contrast, we perturb the
physics and rendering parameters around the identified values
as means. Such purposeful randomization creates a group
ofphysics-aware digital cousins obeying physics laws while
introducing adequate varieties accounting for the unmodeled
discrepancies. The developed world model facilitates the learn-
ing of robust non-prehensile manipulation policies that transfer
effectively from simulation to real-world environments.
III. M ETHOD
A. Overall Framework
We develop real-world non-prehensile manipulation skills
through a two-stage pipeline: Real2Sim system identification
via our physics-informed world model, and Sim2Real policy
transfer enhanced by physics-aware digital cousins. We pro-
vide an overview of our framework in Figure 2.
Real2Sim System Identification :The Real2Sim stage
constructs our physics-informed world model, which identifies
the physics parameters of the target domain from visual
observations. A world model [26] predicts the next system
observation ot+1based on the current observation otand
actions at:
ot+1=W(ot,at,ω), (1)
where tdenotes the time step and ωrepresents the learnable
parameters. A comprehensive physical world for robot inter-
action should account for visual observations, physics, and
geometry [1], and we follow the convention in previous non-
prehensile manipulation works [67, 86] that the geometry is
assumed to be known. Therefore, our PIN-WM W=I ◦g
focuses on learning visual observations and physics of the
target domain, where Iis the differentiable rendering function
(a) Rendering alignment
መ𝐼𝑡+1∇𝜽Multi-view observation 2D Ga ussian Splats
𝐱𝑡+1
PIN-WM
Simulate 𝒂𝑡 Policy  
𝝅መ𝐼𝑡1
መ𝐼𝑡𝑛Physics 𝜽𝟏
Render 𝜶𝟏
Physics 𝜽𝒏
Render 𝜶𝒏𝒂𝑡1
𝒂𝑡𝑛መ𝐼𝑡+11
መ𝐼𝑡+1𝑛𝑟𝑡1
𝑟𝑡𝑛
Policy  
𝝅∗𝐼𝑡 𝒂𝑡Next real observation 𝐼𝑡+1(c) Policy learning with physics -aware digital cousins
(d) Transfer to the target domain without fine -tuning
(b) Identification of physics parameters
Differentiable
Physics (LCP, 𝜽)
𝐱𝑡,𝒂𝑡
Source domain ( 𝜽, 𝜶) 
Target domain (𝜽†, 𝜶†) Rendered image
Ground truthRendering  loss GoalNext renderings መ𝐈𝑡+1
PIN-WM
Success
Source Domain
 Target Domain
 ObjectA. Real2Sim System Identification B. Sim2Real Policy Transfer
Apply 𝒂𝑡
𝛻𝝅 Rewards 𝒓𝑡
…
Target domain
Differentiable
Render (2DGS, 𝜶)
…
…
Fig. 2: Our Real2Sim2Real framework for learning non-prehensile manipulation policies. (a) The robot in the target domain moves around
the object, capturing multi-view observations to estimate the rendering parameters αof 2D Gaussian Splats. (b) Once optimized, αis frozen.
Both source and target domains apply the same task-agnostic physical interactions at. In the source domain, dynamics are computed via
LCP with physical parameters θto update the rendering. θis then optimized with the rendering loss between two domains. (c) The identified
world model is then used for policy learning. Physics-aware perturbations are introduced to αandθto mitigate the remained discrepancies
from inaccurate observations. (d) This ensemble of perturbed world models enhances the Sim2Real transferability of learned policies.
andgis the differentiable physics function. In more detail, the
world model can be rephrased as:
It+1=I(g(xt,at,θ),α), (2)
where g, parameterized by θ, predicts the next state xt+1from
current state xtand action at, andI, parameterized by α,
generates the image It+1corresponding to xt+1. Hence, ω=
{α,θ}forms all learnable parameters for W. The goal of
system identification is to optimize ωso that the generated
images resemble those observed in the target domain.
Sim2Real Policy Transfer :After system identification,
we obtain the world model Was an interactive simula-
tion environment. We can learn non-prehensile manipulation
skills through reinforcement learning, where the learned pol-
icy is expected to achieve Sim2Real transfer without real-
world fine-tuning. However, the identified world model may
deviate from the real world due to inaccurate and partial
observations [43]. We enhance policy transfer performance
by introducing physics-aware digital cousins (PADC). PADC
perturbs the identified system to generate meaningful train-
ing variations, which share similar physics and rendering
properties while introducing distinctions to model unobserved
discrepancies. This approach improves policy transferability
and reduces the learning burden. The learned policy is then
directly deployed in the target domain for manipulation tasks.B. Physics-INformed World Model
In this section, we provide a detailed description of learning
PIN-WM W=I ◦g. To fully characterize the dynamics gof
our system, we adopt rigid body simulation [68] to formulate
the dynamics of scene components that satisfy the momentum
conservation. Therefore, we include the target object, the end-
effector, and the floor in our environment state representation
xt={pt,qt,ξt}, where pt,qt, and ξtrepresents their
positions, orientations, and twist velocities, respectively.
We account for joint, contact, and friction constraints for
rigid body simulation, and include the physical properties of
those scene components that are most concerned by non-
prehensile manipulation tasks [67, 53] into our physical pa-
rameters θ={θM,θk,θµ}, where θMrepresents the mass
and inertia, θkrepresents restitution, and θµrepresents friction
coefficients. Under the rigid-body assumption where object
motion follows the Newton-Euler equations, these parameters
are sufficient to define collision, inertial response, and contact
behavior [20, 68]. Properties like elasticity or plasticity fall
outside the rigid-body scope.
The differentiable rendering function Iis used to align the
visual observations between the source domain and the target
domain. Note that from a differentiable physics perspective,
the floor is stationary, and the robot is the one applying
force actively, whose dynamics will not be affected by other
objects, so only the motion of the target object needs to be
observed and aligned. Therefore, our rendering function only
consider the target object, that is I(xt,α) =I(xo
t,α), where
αrepresents the rendering parameters specifically defined for
the target object, and the rendered image will change with the
update of object pose.
The learning process of our PIN-WM starts with optimizing
αfor rendering alignment, and uses optimized α∗to guide
the identification of physical parameters θfor simulation.
Rendering Alignment :To optimize the rendering param-
etersαfor the target object o, the robot end-effector moves
around oin its initial state xo
0and captures multiple static
scene images with an eye-in-hand camera Is={Is
0, ..., Is
m},
as demonstrated in Figure 2(a). To make sure that the rendering
function Ican generalize to new viewpoints or object poses,
we adopt 2D Gaussian Splatting (2DGS) [34] as the render.
Compared to 3D Gaussian splatting [42], 2DGS is more
effective in capturing surface details.
2DGS renders images by optimizing a set of Gaussian
elliptical disks, which are defined in local tangent uvplanes
in world space:
P(u, v) =pk+sutuu+svtvv=H(u, v,1,1)⊤,(3)
where pkis the central point of the k-th 2D splat. tuandtv
are principal tangential vectors, and tw=tu×tvpresents the
primitive normal. R= [tu,tv,tw]is a3×3rotation matrix
andS= (su, sv)is the scaling vector. The 2D Gaussian for
static object representation can be equivalently represented by
a homogeneous matrix H0∈4×4:
H0=sutusvtv0 p k
0 0 0 1
=
RS p k
0 1
. (4)
During the optimization, we randomly splat 2D disks onto
the object surface Gfor high-quality rendering initialization.
For an image coordinate (x, y), volumetric alpha blending
integrates alpha-weighted appearance to render the image ˆI:
ˆI(x, y) =X
i=1αc
iαo
iGi(u(x, y))i−1Y
j=1 
1−αo
jGj(u(x, y))
,
(5)
where αc
iandαo
iare the color and opacity of the i-th
Gaussian, u(x, y)represents the intersection point between the
ray emitted from the camera viewpoint through the image pixel
(x, y)and the plane where the 2D Gaussian distribution resides
in 3D space, G(u)is the 2D Gaussian value for intersection
u, indicating its weight.
This differentiable rendering models the visual observation
of the target object oin its initial state, and the corresponding
parameters α, including all 2DGS parameters, are optimized
with the following loss function:
L=Lc+ωdLd+ωnLn, (6)
where Lccombines rendering loss [56] Lr=∥ˆI−Is∥2
2with
the D-SSIM term [42]. LdandLnare regularization terms for
depth distortion and normal consistency [34], respectively.
Once the optimal parameters α∗are obtained for the target
object oin its initial state xo
0, any change of the object pose
can lead to the rendering updating, achieved by transformingthe 2DGS accordingly. In more detail, for any new object state
xo
t, we can convert its corresponding pose to a transformation
matrix To
t∈4×4[30]. We then apply To
tto initial Gaus-
sian splats represented by H0, resulting in the transformed
homogeneous matrix:
Ht=To
t(To
0)−1H0. (7)
where To
0represents the static object pose in its initial state xo
0
as the reference. Htcan be used to render the new image for
the target object with an updated state, denoted as I(xt,α∗).
Identification of Physics Parameters :With the opti-
mized rendering parameter α∗, we further estimate the physics
properties θfor simulation, based on the gradient flow from
visual observations established by the differential render. The
robot interacts with the object in state xtthrough a set of
task-agnostic actions A={at, ...,at+n−1}to collect a video
Id={Id
t+1, ..., Id
t+n}capturing dynamics, as shown in Fig-
ure 2(b). The transformed observations ˆI={I(xt+i,α∗)}n
i=1
are then obtained in simulation with Equation 5, where xt+i=
g(xt+i−1,at+i−1,θ)is the updated state when applying action
at+i−1. The physics parameter θis then estimated by minimiz-
ing the discrepancy between the generation ˆIand observation
Id. Therefore, we can represent the objective of the physics
estimation as:
min
θLr(θ) =nX
i=1∥I(g(xt+i−1,at+i−1,θ),α∗)−Id
t+i∥2
2.
(8)
What remains now is to develop a differentiable physics
model xt+1=g(xt,at,θ)for simulation, predicting the
next object pose xt+1based on current state xtand action
at. Note that previous work estimates physics parameters by
differentiating the impact of external wrenches on objects [68].
However, for robotic manipulation, we cannot assume that all
robot parts support wrench measuring. Therefore, we choose
the translation dtof robot end-effector as the action, i.e.,
at=dt.
We formulate this system identification process as a
velocity-based Linear Complementarity Problem (LCP) [16,
68] which solves the equations of motion under global con-
straints. Here, we use LCP to first estimate ξt+1fromxt, and
then further use those two together to update the remaining
pt+1andqt+1. In more detail, given a time horizon Hwhich
describes the duration of an action’s effect, LCP updates twist
velocities of each scene component ξttoξt+1afterH, where
ξtincludes linear velocities vtand angular velocities Ωt.
The updated velocity ξt+1={vt+1,Ωt+1}is then used to
calculate the updated pose {pt+1,qt+1}integrated by the
semi-implicit Euler method [47]:
pt+1=pt+H·vt+1,
qt+1=normalize (qt+H
2([0,Ωt+1]⊗qt)), (9)
where ptandqtare the object’s position and orientation
represented by a quaternion. [0,Ωn+1]represent quaternion
constructed from the angular velocity Ωn+1, and⊗denotes
the quaternion multiplication.
The LCP is solved following the framework by Cline [13],
where the goal is to find velocities ξt+1and Lagrange mul-
tipliers λe,λc,λf,γsatisfying the momentum conservation
when a set of constraints is included:
θMξt+1=θMξt+fg·H+Jeλe+Jcλc+Jfλf,
(Rigid Body Dynamics Equation)
Jeξt+1= 0, (Joint Constraints)
Jcξt+1≥ −θkJcξt≥ −c, (Contact Constraints)
Jfξt+1+Eγ≥0,θµλc≥E⊤λf,(Friction Constraints)
(10)
where fgis the gravity wrench, λe,λc,λf,γare constraint
impulse magnitudes, Eis a binary matrix making the equation
linearly independent at multiple contacts, and Je,Jc,Jfare
input Jacobian matrices describing the joint, contact, and
friction constraints, please refer to [16] for construction details.
Here, joint constraints ensure that connected objects maintain
a specific relative pose, contact constraints prevent interpene-
tration, and friction constraints enforce the maximum energy
dissipation principle.
We adopt the primal-dual interior point method [51] as the
LCP solver to obtain the solution ξt+1while establishing
gradient propagation from ξt+1toθ. We then apply the
method described in [4] to derive the gradients of the solution
with the objective in Equation 8. The output of the physics
model gis contributed by both θand the last state xt, where
xtalso depends on θ. Therefore, the gradients with respect to
θcan be expressed as:
dLr(θ)
dθ=nX
i=1(I(g(xt+i−1,at+i−1,θ),α∗)−Id
t+i)
·(∂I
∂g∂g
∂θ+∂I
∂g∂g
∂xt+i−1∂xt+i−1
∂θ).(11)
As LCP is widely adopted by mainstream simulators [14, 49],
the estimated θcan be compatible with existing simulation
environments [36, 10] as well.
Since we use a velocity-based LCP, the end-effector trans-
lation dcan be converted into velocity ξe=d/H, where
His the action time horizon. This equation holds because
the robot’s mass is typically much greater than the object’s
mass, allowing its own dynamics to be ignored. The pose
and velocity of the floor is kept stationary during the whole
process, and only its geometry and physical parameters are
used for solving the dynamics equation. Moreover, in robot
manipulation, the action time horizon His usually inequiv-
alent to simulation step size h, while the latter is set small
enough to ensure accurate object pose integration (Equation 9).
The input sub-action for each recursion is derived by dividing
the original action atintoH/h segments. We propagate
recursive derivatives of Equation 11 across H/h simulation
time steps and optimize θ.C. Physics-aware Digital Cousins
The learned world model Wreduces the gap with real
worlds and provides an interactive environment for manip-
ulation policy learning. However, inconsistencies with the
real world remain due to inaccurate and partial observations.
Domain randomization [71] randomizes system parameters in
the source domain during training to cover the problem space
of the target, but it often lacks adequate constraints, increasing
training burdens and reducing policy performance. Therefore,
We propose physics-aware digital cousins , which perturb the
rendering and physics near the system’s identified parameters,
as illustrated in Figure 2(c).
We adopt all estimated rendering parameters α∗and physics
parameters θ∗for generating digital cousins. For rendering, we
adopt the spherical harmonics (SH) parameters αsh⊂α∗[58],
which represent the directional rendering component of the
2D Gaussian. Perturbing αshallows modeling of lighting
and material variations. We randomize the system parameters
ωr={αsh,θ∗}by sampling ˜ωrfrom a uniform distribution:
˜ωr∼ U(ωr·(1−δ),ωr·(1 +δ)) (12)
where δindicates perturbation magnitude. For SH parame-
ters, randomization is applied separately to each splat. To
ensure zero-shot policy transfer, we perturb the identified
parameters with δ= 0.1to generate digital cousins. Our
physics-informed world model is compatible with arbitrary
reinforcement learning methods; we adopt Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) [66] for its ease of implementation. The
learned policy is then directly deployed in the target domain
world for manipulation tasks, as shown in Figure 2(d).
IV. R ESULTS AND EVALUATIONS
With our experimental evaluations, we aim to answer the
following questions:
•Does our method outperform other Real2Sim2Real meth-
ods in learning deployable manipulation policies?
•Does PIN-WM achieve more accurate system identifica-
tion compared to existing approaches?
•Does the proposed physics-aware digital cousins (PADC)
help with policy transfer?
•Can our method deliver superior performance in real-
world settings?
We conduct experimental evaluations in both simulation and
the real world. Simulators provide ground truth for evaluating
system identification accuracy and hence offer comprehensive
answers to the first three questions, while the real-world tests
are used to validate the effectiveness of policy deployment
regarding the last question.
We evaluate our method on rigid body motion control. The
robot’s objective is to perform a sequence of non-prehensile
actions to move an object into a target pose. Actions are
specified as translations of the end-effector. We set up two
tasks: push [11] and flip[86]. The push task is to move a planar
object on a plane to a target pose, involving 2D translation in
thexy-plane and 1D rotation around the z-axis. The flip task
Push tasks Flip tasks
Fig. 3: Manipulation trajectories in simulation obtained by our
method for both push andfliptasks.
is to poke an object to turn it from a lying pose to an upside-
down pose, which requires 3D rotation and 3D translation.
A. Evaluations in Simulation
Experiment setup :In simulation, we collect a single
task-agnostic trajectory that the target object is pushed forward
along a straight line by the robot end-effector for a predefined
distance in the target domain. After that, any access to the
target domain is prohibited. Since our estimated parameters
are compatible with existing simulators, we integrate estima-
tions to the Bullet engine [14] for high-performance physics
simulation. With the learned simulator, we train manipulation
policies with only RGB images as input. We maintain 32
parallel threads for efficient training, each running an inde-
pendent physics-aware digital cousin. The initial object pose is
randomized for each episode. After the episode terminates for
each thread, the environment is replaced with a newly sampled
digital cousin. Trained policies are then directly deployed to
the target domain for evaluation. For both push and flip tasks,
we set a relatively low friction in the target domain to highlight
the importance of physics identification. Figure 3 demonstrates
several manipulation trajectories obtained by our method for
both push and flip tasks with different initial states.
Evaluation metrics :To answer the first three questions,
our evaluation metrics focus on both the manipulation policies
and the world models. We measure the success rate Succ %
of a policy if the task is completed within a threshold of
100 steps for push and 25steps for flip. We also consider
the required number of steps to complete a task, denoted as
#Steps . We evaluate the accuracy of a world model using
one-step error [44] which measures the distance between the
final object states after applying one sampled action to theTABLE I: Comparisons on policy performance in the target domain.
MethodsTasks
Push Flip
Succ % # Steps Succ % # Steps
Random 0% 100.0 0% 25.0
Dreamer V2 [27] 1% 99.9 0% 25.0
Diffusion Policy [11] 13% 91.1 10% 23.3
RoboGSim [45] 19% 82.6 21% 20.5
Domain Rand [60] + I 33% 73.6 32% 20.0
2D Physics [67] + I 55% 60.6 8% 22.6
ASID [53] + I 58% 57.6 11% 22.2
PIN-WM w/o PADC 92% 32.1 70% 12.0
PIN-WM w/ PADC 97% 30.1 83% 11.4
identified model and the target-domain simulator. This error
is computed separately for translation and rotation differences,
measured in meters and radians, respectively.
Baseline methods :We compare our method with various
types of approaches for training non-prehensile manipulation
skills, including:
•Methods that rely purely on data. A representative is the
well-known Dreamer V2 [27], which is a latent-space dynam-
ics model from data for handling high-dimensional observa-
tions and learning robust policies. Given their strong reliance
on data quantity, we provide 100 task-agnostic trajectories.
Based on the learned expert policy, we train non-prehensile
manipulation skills via imitating expert demonstrations [35]
of100task-completion trajectories similar to Chi et al. [11].
•Methods with pre-defined physics-based world models.
We use Bullet [14] as the default simulator. Following the
standard domain randomization approach [60], we randomize
the physics parameters in Bullet, including mass, friction,
restitution, and inertia, across a broad range for policy training.
We employ our learned rendering function Ias the renderer.
We set a variant with fixed, random physics and rendering
parameters where no system identification or randomization
is involved, denoted as Random . We also compare with
RoboGSim [45], which optimizes only rendering parameters
using 3DGS [42] but not physics parameters.
•Methods with learned physics-based world models. We
compare with ASID [53] and the method of Song and Boular-
ias [67]. The former performs system identification using
gradient-free optimization. The latter leverages differentiable
2D physics (thus referred to as 2D Physics). Since neither of
the two methods learns rendering parameters and their trained
policies cannot work without aligned visual input, we add our
rendering function Ito enhance these two methods.
Note that all physics-based methods being compared are
trained with the same task-agnostic trajectories as PIN-WM,
for fair comparison. All policies are trained until no significant
success rate performance can be gained and are then deployed
directly to the target domain for evaluation. We also conduct
an ablation study of our method that trains policies without
PADC. More implementation details of baseline methods are
provided in Appendix A.
Comparisons on policy performance :We conduct 100
episodes of tests for each method and report the comparison
results in Table I. Our method achieves the best performance
for both non-prehensile manipulation tasks, thanks to the
accurate system identification of PIN-WM and the meaningful
digital cousins of PADC. Without PADC, our method still
outperforms others, although with a performance decrease.
The purely data-driven world model Dreamer V2 [27],
albeit having access to more task-agnostic data, fails to
accurately approximate the dynamics of the target domain,
resulting in poor performance of the trained and deployed
policies. Diffusion Policy [11], relies on more expensive task-
completion data, also presents inferior performance due to
the limited training data quantity and hence poor out-of-
distribution generalization. These results highlight the impor-
tance of incorporating physics priors in learning world models.
For those methods with pre-defined physics-based world
model, Domain Rand [60] + Iintroduces excessive random-
ness, making the task learning more difficult. We provide a
detailed explanation in Appendix B of why Domain Rand +
Istruggles; smaller-scale randomizations around ground-truth
physical parameters improve its effectiveness, though knowing
these parameters is unrealistic. RoboGSim [45] optimizes only
for rendering parameters but not physics ones, also leading
to performance degradation. In contrast, our physics-aware
digital cousin design, perturbing the physics and rendering
parameters around the identified values as means, creates
meaningful digital cousins allowing for learning robust poli-
cies with Sim2Real transferability.
Moreover, the policies trained with physics-based alterna-
tives exhibit unsatisfactory performance in the target domain.
One reason is that their world models failed to effectively
capture the target-domain dynamics. ASID [53] leads to sub-
optimal solutions due to its inefficient gradient-free optimiza-
tion. Although 2D Physics [67] accounts for 2D differentiable
physics and achieves satisfactory push performance, its per-
formance on the fliptask degrades since it involves 3D rigid
body dynamics. These experiments collectively demonstrate
that an accurate identification of both physics and rendering
parameters is crucial for learning non-prehensile manipula-
tion skills. Although PIN-WM performs physical parameter
identification under the assumption of perfect geometry, we
also provide experiments in Appendix B showing that, even
with noise, the training environment constructed by PIN-WM
effectively supports policy training.
Comparisons on system identification :We compare the
accuracy of system identification of both data-driven and
physics-based approaches. This is done by measuring the one-
step error after applying the same randomly sampled action to
the same surface point of the target object. The results are
reported in Table II.
We observe that the data-driven method Dreamer V2 [27],
as expected, suffer catastrophic performance degradation when
generalizing to new state and action distributions. ASID [53]
shows lower accuracy compared to PIN-WM in both push and
flip tasks, since it is difficult for gradient-free optimization toTABLE II: Comparisons on system identification accuracy across
different methods, using one-step error of the predicted trajectory.
“Trans.” and “Rot.” are translation and rotation errors, respectively.
MethodsTasks
Push Flip
Trans. Ori. Trans. Ori.
Dreamer V2 [27] 7.6×10−25.6×10−12.3×10−12.0
2D Physics [67] 4.2×10−25.4×10−12.1×10−11.6
ASID [53] 3.0×10−24.0×10−11.4×10−11.6
PIN-WM 1.7×10−21.3×10−11.4×10−20.3
0 25 50 75 100
Steps0.000.010.020.030.04Translation ErrorDreamer V2
2D Physics
ASID
PIN-WM
0 25 50 75 100
Steps0.00.20.40.6Orientation Error
Fig. 4: Transition and orientation errors of push task during training.
find a good solution in a finite time due to the large search
space. Although 2D Physics [67] adopts a differentiable frame-
work, the 2D model finds difficulties in handling 3D rigid body
dynamics, resulting in low prediction accuracy. In contrast,
our method learns 3D rigid body physics parameters through
differentiable optimization, achieving superior performance in
both push and flip scenarios. We present the learning curves
of the push task in Figure 4, demonstrating the stability and
efficiency of PIN-WM during training. We can observe that
Dreamer V2 quickly converges on the training dataset, but it
does not generalize well on the test dataset. We also provide
the physical parameters identified by each method, along with
the ground truth parameters, in Appendix B.
B. Evaluations in Real-World
Fig. 5: Our real-world experiment setup.
Experiment setup :Our hardware setup consists of a
robot, an eye-in-hand camera, and an eye-to-hand camera, as
shown in Figure 5. Given a real-world object oand its mesh
geometry G, we use FoundationPose [72] to estimate initial
object pose To
0in the world coordinate system. We set the
mesh geometry Gwith pose To
0in the simulator, and sample
a series of surface points on the transformed mesh To
tGas the
initialization for 2D Gaussian Splatting. The robot then moves
around the object and captures the time-lapse video sequence
TABLE III: Real-world deployment performance.
MethodsTasks
Push Flip
Succ % # Steps Succ % # Steps
Random 0% 100.0 0% 25.0
Domain Rand [60] + I 10% 87.5 25% 18.5
RoboGSim [45] 30% 72.7 15% 21.2
2D Physics [67] + I 35% 70.7 5% 24.1
ASID [53] + I 40% 64.6 10% 22.4
PIN-WM w/o PADC 65% 45.2 60% 13.2
PIN-WM w/ PADC 75% 37.5 65% 11.3
Is, while recording the corresponding camera pose sequence
{Tc
0, ...,Tc
n}. We segment the region of interest with SAM
2 [64] and optimize the 2D Gaussian with the objective in
Equation 6, aligning rendering with the real world. After that,
we apply a straight line of translational actions to push the
object oin the real world. A dynamic video Idis captured by
the eye-to-hand camera to be used for optimizing the physics
parameters θwith Equation 8.
Baseline methods :In the real-world setting, collecting
a large amount of trjactories, either task-agnostic or task-
completion, is highly expensive. Therefore, we only com-
pare with policy learning methods requiring no or few-shot
real-world data , thus excluding data-driven methods such as
Dreamer V2 [27] and Diffusion Policy [11].
Comparisons on policy performance :We evaluate real-
world performance with both push andfliptasks under iden-
tical initial conditions across 20 trials. The push task requires
pushing the T-shaped object to the red target position, while
the flip task involves flipping a mug from its side to an upside-
down pose. The results are summarized in Table III, showing
that PIN-WM can complete the task with higher success rates
and fewer steps.
Conventional simulators with random parameters fail to pro-
duce transferable policies due to physical and rendering mis-
alignment. Although having integrated our rendering function
I, the naive randomization of Domain Rand [60] still creates
noisy variations that degrade policy learning. This is also
demonstrated by the comparisons with RoboGSim [60], which
aligns rendering but not physics parameters. With a more
accurate estimation of physics parameters, 2D Physics [67] and
ASID [53] obtain slightly better results but are still inferior to
PIN-WM. By learning both physical parameters and rendering
representations through differentiable optimization, together
with our physics-aware digital cousins design, our approach
attains much better performance in real-world deployments.
We show comparisons of real-world trajectories of push
task in Figure 6. Our method successfully pushes the T-
shaped object to the target pose with a few steps. In contrast,
alternative approaches either require longer trajectories or fail
to complete the task. We also verify the effectiveness of our
method by demonstrating how it completes the push task
on a larger T-shaped object in Figure 7, demonstrating its
adaptability to varied shapes and sizes. Appendix C provides
real-world comparisons for pushing objects on a slippery glassplane, including both the T-shaped object and a cube object.
We provide trajectories about flipping a mug in Figure 8 and
a cube object in Appendix C.
V. C ONCLUSIONS
We have presented a method of end-to-end learning physics-
informed world models of 3D rigid body dynamics from
visual observations. Our method is able to identify the 3D
physics parameters critical to non-prehensile manipulations
with few-shot and task-agnostic interaction trajectories. To
realize Sim2Real transfer, we turn the identified digital twin
to a group of physics-aware digital cousins through perturbing
the physics and rendering parameters around the identified
mean values. Experiments demonstrate the robustness and
effectiveness of our method when compared with different
types of baseline methods.
Limitation and future work :We see several opportuni-
ties for future research. First, we use visual observations to
guide the optimization of physical parameters, thus rendering
alignment places a key role here. We find that the various
shadows generated with the robot’s movement can distort ren-
dering loss estimation, compromising the accuracy of learned
physical properties. This issue could potentially be resolved
by incorporating differentiable relighting [22] into Gaussian
Splatting to better model lighting conditions. Additionally, our
current framework focus on rigid-body dynamics, and it would
be interesting to explore ways to integrate more advanced
differentiable physics engines, such as the Material Point
Method (MPM) [59], to extend PIN-WM’s capability to handle
deformable objects. We are also engaged in applying PIN-WM
to real-world applications in industrial automation [70, 82, 83].
VI. A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by the NSFC (62325211,
62132021, 62322207), the Major Program of Xiangjiang
Laboratory (23XJ01009), Key R&D Program of Wuhan
(2024060702030143), Shenzhen University Natural Sciences
2035 Program (2022C007), and Guangdong Laboratory of
ArtificialIntelligence and Digital Economy Open Research
Fund (GML-KF-24-35).
REFERENCES
[1] Jad Abou-Chakra, Krishan Rana, Feras Dayoub, and
Niko Suenderhauf. Physically embodied gaussian splat-
ting: A visually learnt and physically grounded 3d repre-
sentation for robotics. In Conference on Robot Learning ,
2024.
[2] Niket Agarwal, Arslan Ali, Maciej Bala, Yogesh Bal-
aji, Erik Barker, Tiffany Cai, Prithvijit Chattopadhyay,
Yongxin Chen, Yin Cui, Yifan Ding, et al. Cosmos
world foundation model platform for physical ai. IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
2025.
[3] Srinivas Akella and Matthew T Mason. Posing polygonal
objects in the plane by pushing. The International
Journal of Robotics Research , 1998.
Domain Rand. RoboGSim ASID 2D Physics PIN-WM (ours)Time lapse Result
Fig. 6: Real-world trajectories of different methods on the push task.
Large T Small TTime lapse Result
Fig. 7: Real-world trajectories of pushing T-shaped objects of different sizes obtained by our method.
[4] Brandon Amos and J Zico Kolter. Optnet: Differentiable
optimization as a layer in neural networks. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning , 2017.
[5] Fabian Baumeister, Lukas Mack, and Joerg Stueckler.
Incremental few-shot adaptation for non-prehensile ob-
ject manipulation using parallelizable physics simulators.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.13228 , 2024.
[6] Suneel Belkhale, Yuchen Cui, and Dorsa Sadigh. Data
quality in imitation learning. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , 2024.
[7] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Sub-
biah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Nee-
lakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell,et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2020.
[8] Junyi Cao, Shanyan Guan, Yanhao Ge, Wei Li, Xiaokang
Yang, and Chao Ma. Neuma: Neural material adaptor for
visual grounding of intrinsic dynamics. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024.
[9] Rongsen Chen, Junhong Zhao, Fang-Lue Zhang, Andrew
Chalmers, and Taehyun Rhee. Neural radiance fields for
dynamic view synthesis using local temporal priors. In
Computational Visual Media , 2024.
[10] Yuanpei Chen, Tianhao Wu, Shengjie Wang, Xidong
Feng, Jiechuan Jiang, Zongqing Lu, Stephen McAleer,
Hao Dong, Song-Chun Zhu, and Yaodong Yang. Towards
Domain Rand. RoboGSim ASID 2D Physics PIN-WMTime lapse
Fig. 8: Real-world trajectories of different methods on the fliptask.
human-level bimanual dexterous manipulation with re-
inforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 2022.
[11] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau,
Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran
Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via
action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics
Research , 2023.
[12] Ignasi Clavera, David Held, and Pieter Abbeel. Policy
transfer via modularity and reward guiding. In IEEE
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems, 2017.
[13] Michael Bradley Cline. Rigid body simulation with
contact and constraints . PhD thesis, University of British
Columbia, 2002.
[14] Erwin Coumans and Yunfei Bai. Pybullet, a python
module for physics simulation for games, robotics and
machine learning, 2016.
[15] Tianyuan Dai, Josiah Wong, Yunfan Jiang, Chen Wang,
Cem Gokmen, Ruohan Zhang, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei.
Automated creation of digital cousins for robust policy
learning. In Conference on Robot Learning , 2024.
[16] Filipe de Avila Belbute-Peres, Kevin Smith, Kelsey
Allen, Josh Tenenbaum, and J Zico Kolter. End-to-end
differentiable physics for learning and control. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018.
[17] Mehmet Remzi Dogar and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. A
framework for push-grasping in clutter. In Robotics:
Science and Systems , 2011.
[18] Henrik Ebel, Daniel Niklas Fahse, Mario Rosenfelder,
and Peter Eberhard. Finding formations for the non-
prehensile object transportation with differentially-driven
mobile robots. In Symposium on Robot Design, Dynam-
ics and Control , 2022.
[19] Ben Evans, Abitha Thankaraj, and Lerrel Pinto. Con-text is everything: Implicit identification for dynamics
adaptation. In International Conference on Robotics and
Automation , 2022.
[20] Roy Featherstone. Rigid body dynamics algorithms .
Springer, 2014.
[21] Juan Del Aguila Ferrandis, Joao Moura, and Sethu Vi-
jayakumar. Learning visuotactile estimation and control
for non-prehensile manipulation under occlusions. In
Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2024.
[22] Jian Gao, Chun Gu, Youtian Lin, Zhihao Li, Hao Zhu,
Xun Cao, Li Zhang, and Yao Yao. Relightable 3d
gaussians: Realistic point cloud relighting with brdf
decomposition and ray tracing. In European Conference
on Computer Vision , 2024.
[23] Radian Gondokaryono, Mustafa Haiderbhai, Sai Aneesh
Suryadevara, and Lueder A Kahrs. Learning nonprehen-
sile dynamic manipulation: Sim2real vision-based policy
with a surgical robot. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters , 2023.
[24] Michael Grieves and John Vickers. Digital twin: Miti-
gating unpredictable, undesirable emergent behavior in
complex systems. Transdisciplinary Perspectives on
Complex Systems: New Findings and Approaches , 2017.
[25] David Ha and J ¨urgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.10122 , 2018.
[26] Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mo-
hammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning behaviors
by latent imagination. In International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2020.
[27] Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Mohammad
Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with discrete
world models. In International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2021.
[28] Nicklas Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. Temporal
difference learning for model predictive control. In
International Conference on Machine Learning , 2022.
[29] Nicklas Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. TD-
MPC2: scalable, robust world models for continuous
control. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations , 2024.
[30] Richard Hartley and Andrew Zisserman. Multiple view
geometry in computer vision . Cambridge university press,
2003.
[31] Eric Heiden, David Millard, Erwin Coumans, Yizhou
Sheng, and Gaurav S Sukhatme. Neuralsim: Augmenting
differentiable simulators with neural networks. In IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation ,
2021.
[32] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising
diffusion probabilistic models. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2020.
[33] Yingdong Hu, Fanqi Lin, Pingyue Sheng, Chuan Wen,
Jiacheng You, and Yang Gao. Data scaling laws in
imitation learning for robotic manipulation. In Workshop
on X-Embodiment Robot Learning , 2024.
[34] Binbin Huang, Zehao Yu, Anpei Chen, Andreas Geiger,
and Shenghua Gao. 2d gaussian splatting for geometri-
cally accurate radiance fields. In SIGGRAPH , 2024.
[35] Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan,
and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning: A survey of
learning methods. ACM Computing Surveys , 2017.
[36] Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and
Andrew J Davison. Rlbench: The robot learning bench-
mark & learning environment. IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters , 2020.
[37] Xinyi Jing, Qiao Feng, Yu-Kun Lai, Jinsong Zhang,
Yuanqiang Yu, and Kun Li. State: Learning structure
and texture representations for novel view synthesis.
Computational Visual Media , 2023.
[38] Xinyi Jing, Tao Yu, Renyuan He, Yukun Lai, and Kun
Li. Frnerf: Fusion and regularization fields for dynamic
view synthesis. Computational Visual Media , 2024.
[39] Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian
Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre Quillen,
Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke,
et al. Scalable deep reinforcement learning for vision-
based robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot
Learning , 2018.
[40] Rama Krishna Kandukuri, Michael Strecke, and Joerg
Stueckler. Physics-based rigid body object tracking and
friction filtering from rgb-d videos. In International
Conference on 3D Vision , 2024.
[41] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B
Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray,
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scal-
ing laws for neural language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.08361 , 2020.
[42] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk ¨uhler,
and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics ,
2023.
[43] Keisuke Kinoshita and Michael Lindenbaum. Robotic
control with partial visual information. International
Journal of Computer Vision , 2000.
[44] Nathan Lambert, Kristofer Pister, and Roberto Calandra.
Investigating compounding prediction errors in learned
dynamics models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09637 ,
2022.
[45] Xinhai Li, Jialin Li, Ziheng Zhang, Rui Zhang, Fan Jia,
Tiancai Wang, Haoqiang Fan, Kuo-Kun Tseng, and Ruip-
ing Wang. Robogsim: A real2sim2real robotic gaussian
splatting simulator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11839 ,
2024.
[46] Xuan Li, Yi-Ling Qiao, Peter Yichen Chen, Kr-
ishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Ming C. Lin, Chenfanfu
Jiang, and Chuang Gan. Pac-nerf: Physics augmented
continuum neural radiance fields for geometry-agnostic
system identification. In International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2023.
[47] Zhehao Li, Qingyu Xu, Xiaohan Ye, Bo Ren, and Ligang
Liu. Difffr: Differentiable sph-based fluid-rigid coupling
for rigid body control. ACM Transactions on Graphics ,2023.
[48] Michael Lutter, Christian Ritter, and Jan Peters. Deep
lagrangian networks: Using physics as model prior for
deep learning. In International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2019.
[49] Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong
Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin, David
Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa,
and Gavriel State. Isaac gym: High performance GPU
based physics simulation for robot learning. In Neural
Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and
Benchmarks , 2021.
[50] Matthew T Mason. Mechanics and planning of manip-
ulator pushing operations. The International Journal of
Robotics Research , 1986.
[51] Jacob Mattingley and Stephen Boyd. Cvxgen: A code
generator for embedded convex optimization. Optimiza-
tion and Engineering , 2012.
[52] Bhairav Mehta, Manfred Diaz, Florian Golemo, Christo-
pher J Pal, and Liam Paull. Active domain randomiza-
tion. In Conference on Robot Learning , 2020.
[53] Marius Memmel, Andrew Wagenmaker, Chuning Zhu,
Dieter Fox, and Abhishek Gupta. ASID: Active explo-
ration for system identification in robotic manipulation.
InInternational Conference on Learning Representa-
tions , 2024.
[54] Russell Mendonca, Shikhar Bahl, and Deepak Pathak.
Structured world models from human videos. In
Robotics: Science and Systems , 2023.
[55] Takahiro Miki, Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz
Wellhausen, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning
robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal robots in
the wild. Science Robotics , 2022.
[56] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng.
Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for
view synthesis. Communications of the ACM , 2021.
[57] Tai-Jiang Mu, Hao-Xiang Chen, Jun-Xiong Cai, and
Ning Guo. Neural 3d reconstruction from sparse views
using geometric priors. Computational Visual Media ,
2023.
[58] Thomas M ¨uller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and
Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics primitives with
a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on
Graphics , 2022.
[59] J. Krishna Murthy, Miles Macklin, Florian Golemo,
Vikram V oleti, Linda Petrini, Martin Weiss, Brean-
dan Considine, J ´erˆome Parent-L ´evesque, Kevin Xie,
Kenny Erleben, Liam Paull, Florian Shkurti, Derek
Nowrouzezahrai, and Sanja Fidler. gradsim: Differen-
tiable simulation for system identification and visuomo-
tor control. In International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2021.
[60] Xue Bin Peng, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech
Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Sim-to-real transfer of
robotic control with dynamics randomization. In IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation ,
2018.
[61] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al.
Learning transferable visual models from natural lan-
guage supervision. In International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning , 2021.
[62] Rafael Rafailov, Tianhe Yu, Aravind Rajeswaran, and
Chelsea Finn. Offline reinforcement learning from im-
ages with latent space models. In Learning for Dynamics
and Control , 2021.
[63] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karni-
adakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learn-
ing framework for solving forward and inverse problems
involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal
of Computational Physics , 2019.
[64] Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang
Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Ro-
man R ¨adle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, et al. Sam
2: Segment anything in images and videos. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.00714 , 2024.
[65] Reuven Y Rubinstein and Dirk P Kroese. The cross-
entropy method: a unified approach to combinatorial op-
timization, Monte-Carlo simulation, and machine learn-
ing. Springer, 2004.
[66] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec
Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017.
[67] Changkyu Song and Abdeslam Boularias. Learning to
slide unknown objects with differentiable physics simu-
lations. In Robotics: Science and Systems , 2020.
[68] Michael Strecke and Joerg Stueckler. Diffsdfsim: Dif-
ferentiable rigid-body dynamics with implicit shapes. In
International Conference on 3D Vision , 2021.
[69] Richard S Sutton. Reinforcement learning: An introduc-
tion. A Bradford Book , 2018.
[70] Bingjie Tang, Iretiayo Akinola, Jie Xu, Bowen Wen,
Ankur Handa, Karl Van Wyk, Dieter Fox, Gaurav S.
Sukhatme, Fabio Ramos, and Yashraj S. Narang. Au-
tomate: Specialist and generalist assembly policies over
diverse geometries. In Robotics: Science and Systems ,
2024.
[71] Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider,
Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain ran-
domization for transferring deep neural networks from
simulation to the real world. In IEEE International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , 2017.
[72] Bowen Wen, Wei Yang, Jan Kautz, and Stan Birchfield.
Foundationpose: Unified 6d pose estimation and tracking
of novel objects. In IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024.
[73] Grady Williams, Andrew Aldrich, and Evangelos A
Theodorou. Model predictive path integral control: From
theory to parallel computation. Journal of Guidance,
Control, and Dynamics , 2017.[74] Philipp Wu, Alejandro Escontrela, Danijar Hafner, Pieter
Abbeel, and Ken Goldberg. Daydreamer: World models
for physical robot learning. In Conference on Robot
Learning , 2022.
[75] Tong Wu, Yu-Jie Yuan, Ling-Xiao Zhang, Jie Yang, Yan-
Pei Cao, Ling-Qi Yan, and Lin Gao. Recent advances
in 3d gaussian splatting. Computational Visual Media ,
2024.
[76] Guo-Wei Yang, Zheng-Ning Liu, Dong-Yang Li, and
Hao-Yang Peng. Jnerf: An efficient heterogeneous nerf
model zoo based on jittor. Computational Visual Media ,
2023.
[77] Sarah Young, Dhiraj Gandhi, Shubham Tulsiani, Abhinav
Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Visual imitation
made easy. In Conference on Robot Learning , 2021.
[78] Kuan-Ting Yu, Maria Bauza, Nima Fazeli, and Alberto
Rodriguez. More than a million ways to be pushed. a
high-fidelity experimental dataset of planar pushing. In
IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems , 2016.
[79] Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon,
James Y Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and Tengyu
Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
2020.
[80] Weihao Yuan, Johannes A Stork, Danica Kragic,
Michael Y Wang, and Kaiyu Hang. Rearrangement with
nonprehensile manipulation using deep reinforcement
learning. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation , 2018.
[81] Xiangyu Yue, Yang Zhang, Sicheng Zhao, Alberto
Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, Kurt Keutzer, and Boqing
Gong. Domain randomization and pyramid consistency:
Simulation-to-real generalization without accessing tar-
get domain data. In IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision , 2019.
[82] Hang Zhao, Zherong Pan, Yang Yu, and Kai Xu. Learn-
ing physically realizable skills for online packing of
general 3d shapes. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 2023.
[83] Hang Zhao, Juzhan Xu, Kexiong Yu, Ruizhen Hu,
Chenyang Zhu, and Kai Xu. Deliberate planning of
3d bin packing on packing configuration trees. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.04421 , 2025.
[84] Gaoyue Zhou, Hengkai Pan, Yann LeCun, and Lerrel
Pinto. Dino-wm: World models on pre-trained vi-
sual features enable zero-shot planning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.04983 , 2024.
[85] Jiaji Zhou, Yifan Hou, and Matthew T Mason. Pushing
revisited: Differential flatness, trajectory planning, and
stabilization. The International Journal of Robotics
Research , 2019.
[86] Wenxuan Zhou, Bowen Jiang, Fan Yang, Chris Paxton,
and David Held. Hacman: Learning hybrid actor-critic
maps for 6d non-prehensile manipulation. In Conference
on Robot Learning , 2023.
APPENDIX
A. Implementation Details for Baselines
All the baselines are implemented carefully to ensure fair
comparison. We used the official implementations with default
hyperparameters for Diffusion Policy [11], 2D Physics [67],
and Dreamer V2 [27]. A history of recent states and actions
is used as input for the “Domain Rand + I” (denoted as
DR) baseline [60]. All RL-based policies are trained using
PPO [66], with the same model architecture, reward function,
hyperparameters, and stopping criterion based on the success
rate. The reward signal for policy learning is a handcrafted
function to encourage the robot to push the object toward the
target pose: r=−dt−dr, where dtanddrrefer to the trans-
lation distance and rotation distance, respectively. Diffusion
Policy is trained with successful trajectories collected from
expert policies trained in the environment with GT physical
parameters, without any randomization.
B. More Experimental Results
1) Superiority over uniform randomization: The only dif-
ference between our method and the DR baseline is the
different ranges of physics parameters that are used for domain
randomization, where DR uses a large range Rto ensure that
it covers the target parameters θ†while our method uses a
much smaller range around the learned parameters θ∗. The
low performance of DR is mainly due to the large range of R
and the performance can be improved by shrinking the range
around θ†(even though this is not feasible in real application
scenarios), and using GT θ†directly can obtain the best result,
as presented in Table IV.
TABLE IV: Success rates across different ranges of randomization.
Tasks GT PIN-WM w/ PADC DR ( R/4) DR ( R/2) DR ( R)
Push 98% 97% 78% 56% 33%
Flip 89% 83% 61% 43% 32%
2) Identified physical parameters: System identification is
inherently ill-posed, as multiple parameter sets can explain
the same observations. To fairly compare the accuracy across
different methods, we estimate one parameter at a time while
keeping the others fixed at their GT values. Since inertia is
typically represented as a 3×3matrix in simulation, we do
not conduct this experiment. Our method consistently achieves
the best performance, as shown in Table V.
TABLE V: Identified physical parameters.
MethodsPush Flip
Friction Mass (kg) Restitution Friction Mass (kg) Restitution
GT 3.00×10−21.00 0.00 2.00×10−11.00 0.00
ASID 4.45×10−20.75 1.12×10−22.59×10−11.36 1.12×10−2
2D Physics – 19.25 – – 29.60 –
PIN-WM 3.05×10−20.76 4 .18×10−42.11×10−11.19 1 .69×10−5
3) Robustness to geometry noise: Geometry noise will
affect collision detection accuracy and, consequently, system
identification. To evaluate this, we conduct experiments on
noisy inputs, in which the noise conforms to a Gaussian
distribution with a mean of 0 and a variance of σ%L, where
σ∈ {0,0.5,1.0,3.0}andLis the length of object’s boundingbox diagonal. We report one-step error of the predicted trajec-
tories after applying the same random actions to the object. As
shown in Table VI, while the prediction errors increase with
higher noise, our method remains robust even at σ= 3.0,
outperforming ASID [53] using perfect geometry.
TABLE VI: One-step errors across different noise levels.
MethodsPush Flip
Trans. Ori. Trans. Ori.
PIN-WM ( σ= 0.0)1.7×10−21.3×10−11.4×10−22.7×10−1
PIN-WM ( σ= 0.5)2.1×10−22.1×10−14.2×10−29.6×10−1
PIN-WM ( σ= 1.0)2.3×10−21.6×10−14.2×10−29.5×10−1
PIN-WM ( σ= 3.0)2.9×10−23.0×10−17.7×10−21.5
ASID 3.0×10−24.0×10−11.4×10−11.6
C. Further Real-World Evaluations
We further validate the effectiveness of PIN-WM in iden-
tifying real-world physical parameters. We push a T-shaped
object and a cube object on a slippery glass plane. Even
small touches cause noticeable displacement, which poses
higher demands on the robot’s control precision. The smaller
mass and volume of the cube make it harder to manipulate.
Real-world trajectories are provided in Figures 9 and 10,
separately. PIN-WM demonstrates strong performance on both
objects, successfully pushing them to the target positions. In
contrast, the baseline ASID consistently pushes the objects
with excessive force just before reaching the target position,
making it difficult to complete the task. We also conduct flip
experiments on the small cube, with the trajectories provided
in Figure 11. The quantitative results of these experiments are
summarized in Table VII.
TABLE VII: Success rate comparisons on different real-world tasks.
Methods Push T (Slippery) Push Cube (Slippery) Flip Cube
ASID 5% 0% 5%
PIN-WM 45% 40% 60%
Time lapseASID PIN-WM
Fig. 9: Push T-shaped object on a slippery plane.
Time lapseASID PIN-WM
Fig. 10: Push cube object on a slippery plane.
Time lapseASID PIN-WM
Fig. 11: Flip a multicolored cube to change its top-surface color.