Meta-Learning Online Dynamics Model Adaptation
in Off-Road Autonomous Driving
Jacob Levy∗, Jason Gibson†, Bogdan Vlahov†, Erica Tevere‡, Evangelos Theodorou†,
David Fridovich-Keil∗, Patrick Spieler‡
∗University of Texas at Austin†Georgia Institute of Technology
‡Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
Abstract —High-speed off-road autonomous driving presents
unique challenges due to complex, evolving terrain characteristics
and the difficulty of accurately modeling terrain-vehicle interac-
tions. While dynamics models used in model-based control can
be learned from real-world data, they often struggle to generalize
to unseen terrain, making real-time adaptation essential. We
propose a novel framework that combines a Kalman filter-
based online adaptation scheme with meta-learned parameters
to address these challenges. Offline meta-learning optimizes
the basis functions along which adaptation occurs, as well as
the adaptation parameters, while online adaptation dynamically
adjusts the onboard dynamics model in real time for model-based
control. We validate our approach through extensive experiments,
including real-world testing on a full-scale autonomous off-road
vehicle, demonstrating that our method outperforms baseline
approaches in prediction accuracy, performance, and safety
metrics, particularly in safety-critical scenarios. Our results
underscore the effectiveness of meta-learned dynamics model
adaptation, advancing the development of reliable autonomous
systems capable of navigating diverse and unseen environments.
Video is available at: https://youtu.be/cCKHHrDRQEA
I. I NTRODUCTION
High-speed off-road autonomous driving presents a unique
set of challenges where precise and reliable control is essen-
tial for traversing complex and unseen environments. These
settings are characterized by diverse terrain types such as
sand, snow, and dense vegetation, as well as varying terrain
conditions like wetness, deformability, and roughness. Such
variability can significantly alter vehicle dynamics, introducing
substantial uncertainties [22, 2, 40, 32]. Just as a human driver
adjusts their driving policy based on how the vehicle responds
to the terrain, autonomous systems must adapt dynamically to
maintain both performance and safety.
Autonomous systems are increasingly relied upon in sce-
narios where human intervention is impractical, too slow, or
dangerous. For instance, Mars rovers operate with onboard
autonomy to identify obstacles and plan safe paths, as com-
munication delays prevent real-time teleoperation [46, 35].
On Earth, autonomous vehicles hold significant potential for
disaster response, where hazardous environments could render
human operation unsafe [26, 27, 29]. Similarly, in mining and
resource extraction, they can transport materials across rugged
and hazardous terrains, improving operational efficiency and
worker safety [6]. Safety is paramount in these scenarios, as
entering dangerous zones or tipping the vehicle over could
have severe consequences for mission success or operational
Baseline Meta -adaptation (ours)
Path of vehicle Rollover limit exceededFig. 1: Trajectories for a single 3-lap run, with insets displaying video
stills. The baseline configuration shows erratic trajectories with frequent
course boundary and rollover limit violations. In contrast, our adaptation
configuration demonstrates more deliberate and compliant trajectories as the
car learns the terrain dynamics in real time.
integrity.
When system dynamics are known, model-based control
techniques are widely used for the effective control of au-
tonomous systems. For instance, model predictive path integral
(MPPI) control [50] is an algorithm that rolls out sampled
control inputs on a dynamics model to identify optimal tra-
jectories. This method has demonstrated significant success
in off-road autonomous driving applications [8, 19, 28, 16,
33, 48], but its performance hinges on the accuracy of the
underlying dynamics model. Accurately modeling interactions
between vehicles and terrain remains a significant challenge,
particularly in high-speed off-road driving, where changing
terrain and operational conditions push the vehicle to its
performance limits. When the dynamics model fails to capture
these interactions, it can lead to degraded performance and
compromised safety.
To address these limitations, hybrid approaches have
emerged, integrating first-principles dynamics models witharXiv:2504.16923v1  [cs.RO]  23 Apr 2025
LSTM & FNNMulti-step
Prediction
Parametric
Model
Bias Adaptation 
Weight Adaptation Kalman
Filter
Update
Bias
Algorithm 1Predict with
 to 
Loss Meta-learned Parameters
OptimizerData Collection Offline Meta-Learning (Algorithm 2)Online Adaptation (Algorithm 1)
Last Layer Ensemble Ensemble W eighting
State
Control
Input Trajectories
ActualFor adaptation PredictedFig. 2: Meta-learning online dynamics model adaptation. Online, a Kalman filter updates the linear combination of an ensemble of last-layer weights
(Algorithm 1). Offline, trajectory segments are used to meta-learn model parameters, the last-layer ensemble, and the Kalman filter parameters (Algorithm 2).
learned components to improve predictive accuracy [12, 25,
13, 16, 30]. While these models are effective under nominal
conditions, they can struggle to generalize to previously un-
seen terrains or adapt to evolving dynamics during operation.
This limitation underscores the need for adaptive models
capable of online adjustment.
We propose a novel framework (Fig. 2) for meta-learned
online dynamics model adaptation designed to address these
challenges. By leveraging meta-learning techniques, our
method enables efficient and effective adaptation of the dy-
namics model to real-time sensor data. This approach allows
the system to adjust to changes in terrain and vehicle behavior
dynamically, providing accurate predictions essential for safe
and efficient control. Our contributions include:
•A meta-learning framework for offline optimization of
adaptation basis functions and parameters, along with
dynamics model parameters.
•An efficient Kalman filter-based online adaptation scheme
to update model parameters in real time, addressing the
challenges of noisy and delayed state measurements.
•Empirical validation of our method on a full-scale au-
tonomous off-road vehicle and simulated environments,
showcasing improved performance and safety metrics
over baseline approaches.
By bridging the gap between predictive accuracy and adapt-
ability, our framework establishes a foundation for safer and
more effective high-speed off-road autonomy.II. R ELATED WORK
A. Off-road Autonomous Driving
State-of-the-art approaches in off-road autonomous driving
often rely on model-based control strategies, where accurate
dynamics models are essential for planning and executing
trajectories effectively [19, 33, 8]. To account for the com-
plexity of terrain-vehicle interactions, some methods augment
dynamics models with learned components derived from real-
world driving data [28, 16]. However, these approaches typ-
ically assume static terrain conditions and lack mechanisms
for adapting to changes in terrain type during operation. To
address the variability of terrain, some methods incorporate
perceptual information into learned dynamics models to infer
terrain properties, enabling more informed control [9, 38, 17].
While effective in many scenarios, these approaches lack the
ability to adapt when the vehicle encounters previously unseen
terrain. Our work directly addresses this limitation by intro-
ducing a framework for online dynamics model adaptation. By
dynamically adjusting the dynamics model in real time, our
method allows the vehicle to respond effectively to unseen
terrain properties and evolving environmental conditions.
B. System Identification / Adaptive Control
In offline system identification, the parameters of a dynam-
ics model are learned from pre-collected data, and the resulting
model is then used for model-based control during online
operation. In autonomous driving, this approach has been ap-
plied to parametric models [1, 4], hybrid models that combine
learned and first-principles components [9, 16, 11], and even
full black-box dynamics models [49]. To enable adaptation
during real-time operation, indirect adaptive control methods
identify dynamics parameters online and update the dynamics
model continuously, which is then used for control [23]. Prior
work has successfully demonstrated indirect adaptive control
for autonomous driving applications [24, 31, 34, 44]. However,
these methods rely on manually designed basis functions and
user-tuned learning rates, requiring significant user effort that
could lead to suboptimal results. In this work, we use meta-
learning to automate both, enabling more efficient, accurate,
and robust online parameter adaptation across diverse terrain
and driving conditions.
C. Meta-learning
Meta-learning, or “learning to learn,” is a paradigm that
enables machine learning models to rapidly adapt to new tasks
or environments by optimizing for efficient adaptation across
task distributions [15, 20, 21]. This often involves a two-phase
process: an offline meta-training phase to prepare the model
for adaptation and an online phase where the model adapts
to a specific task or environment in real time. In robotics,
successful applications of meta-learning involve learning adap-
tation modules that infer latent environment representations
[47, 52, 43, 7, 51], optimizing controller parameters for rapid
adaptation [45, 39], and learning to adapt traversability maps
to changing environments [42]. The closest line of work to
ours involves using meta-learning to optimize a Kalman filter
[37] or a recursive least squares [32] model adaptation scheme
for model-based control. These methods rely on user-defined
adaptation rates, whereas our approach utilizes meta-learning
to dynamically determine optimal rates based on collected
data. Another related work, [41], uses meta-learning to op-
timize Kalman filter parameters that govern adaptation rates.
However, its prediction model targets performance metrics
directly, bypassing system dynamics. In contrast, our approach
adapts a physics-informed dynamics model, incorporating
physics-based principles into the adaptation process.
III. P RELIMINARIES
A. Vehicle Dynamics
We model the vehicle dynamics according to [18, 17]; a
brief overview is presented here. The dynamics are a discrete-
time nonlinear system of the form
xt+1=f(xt, ut, yt), (1)
where ut∈R3is the control input consisting of the throttle,
brake, and steering inputs; and yt∈R14is external sensor
input containing roll, pitch, and surface normal vectors at the
four wheels. The state of the vehicle xtis fully observable and
composed of xt= [pt, vt, zt]∈R10, where pt∈R3consists
of the global position and yaw, vt∈R3consists of the body-
frame forward and lateral velocities and yaw-rate, and zt∈R4
consists of the brake position, the steering column angle and
velocity, and the engine speed. Euler integration is used to
propagate the dynamics with:
f(xt, ut, yt) =EAR(pt)xt+EB
vT
t˙vtT˙ztTT,(2)where EAandEB, are Euler integration matrices, R(·)is a
rotation matrix which rotates velocities from the body frame
to the global frame, and ˙ztis computed using a pre-trained
brake, steering, and engine model: ˙zt=gz(xt, ut).
The acceleration ˙vtis predicted with a hybrid parametric
and learned model:
˙vt=M−1X(xt) [Ft+ζ(ηt;ϕ, θt)] +Dt, (3)
where M−1is the inverse of a mass matrix, X(·)transforms
forces from the wheel frame to the body frame, ζ(·)contains a
long short-term memory (LSTM) network and a feedforward
neural network (FNN) with learned parameters ϕ∈Rnϕand
adaptable parameters θt∈Rnθwhich predicts residuals to
tire forces Ft, and the input to the neural networks ηtis
the following concatenation: ηt= [xt, ut, yt, Ft]. The tire
forces Ftand the Coriolis and drag accelerations Dtare
computed using parametric models Ft=gF(xt, ut;ψ)and
Dt=gD(xt;ψ)with parametric model parameters ψ∈Rpψ.
B. Control Architecture
We adopt the control architecture in [18], which is based
on Model Predictive Path Integral Control (MPPI) [50, 48],
a sampling-based Model Predictive Control (MPC) method.
Each time MPPI is called, it estimates the optimal control
sequence u∗
s={us, . . . , u s+T}which minimizes the cost
function:
J(us) =V(xs+1+T) +s+TX
t=s[l(xt, ut, yt) +V(xt)] (4)
by sampling Nsequences of controls {ui
s}N
i=1, rolling out each
control sequence on dynamics (1) for Tsteps, and computing
the cost of each trajectory with (4). The cost-to-go V(·)comes
from a higher-level state lattice planner that computes the
optimal cost to the target waypoint using Dijkstra’s algorithm
[10].
Remark 1. MPPI depends on the dynamics model (1); an
accurate dynamics model is crucial for predicting accurate
rollouts for the optimization process.
The stage cost l(·)is the sum of the following components:
l(xt, ut, yt) =track (xt)
+rollover (xt, yt)
+other (xt, ut, yt).(5)
The track cost track (·)is derived from a grid-based
traversability map generated using perception data and se-
mantic terrain classification. Grid cells associated with more
challenging terrain are assigned higher costs and traversal
beyond user-defined boundaries incurs a significant cost. The
rollover cost rollover (·)is computed as follows:
rollover (x, y) =Pn 
min 
FL, FR
;rlimit
, (6)
where FL, FR∈[0,1]are the mass-normalized normal forces
acting on the left- and right-side tires, computed from the
inclination of the ground, and the vehicle mass distribution,
forward velocity, and steering angle; a value of 0and1corre-
spond to unloaded and fully loaded, respectively. Pn(·;rlimit)
is a function which exhibits growth proportional to power n
of the input whenever the input falls below the limit rlimit .
Here, (6) produces a high cost when the loading on the left or
right wheels fall below the minimum loading threshold. Other
cost terms such as control effort and wheel slip are grouped
intoother (·).
IV. M ETA-LEARNING MODEL ADAPTATION
In this section, we present our approach (Fig. 2), detailing
how we design the adaptable components of the dynamics
model, the online scheme for real-time parameter updates, and
the meta-learning framework for optimizing adaptation.
A. Adaptable Parameters
Selection of the adaptable parameters θis crucial in online
dynamics model adaptation. Adapting all parameters ϕof
the LSTM and FNN in real-time is impractical for online
adaptation, as the sheer number of parameters would result
in prohibitively slow updates with respect to the timescale
of the changing dynamics involved with high-speed off-road
driving. On the other hand, adapting only the parameters of
the parametric model ψwould be insufficient because this
model cannot fully capture complex terrain interactions that
the learned model ζ(·)is designed to address. Adapting only
the parameters of the last layer of such learned models has
proven effective in prior work [5, 37, 21]; this approach
yields adaptable parameters that are linear with respect to the
dynamics, enabling faster adaptation.
To achieve adaptation fast enough for high-speed off-road
driving, we further streamline adaptation by reducing the
number of adapted parameters nθ, focusing on only adapting
the linear combination of an ensemble of last-layer weights
(Fig. 2). We represent the ensemble of last-layer weights
in the FNN as a tensor W∈Rnw×nout×nin, where nw
denotes the ensemble size, and ninandnoutare the input
and output feature dimensions of the last layer, respectively.
The weight matrices of the ensemble are stacked along the
first dimension to form this tensor. Now, we express how the
adapted parameters appear in the learned model with:
ζ(η;ϕ, θ) = (ϕw+θw)TWΦ(η;ϕl) +ϕb+θb, (7)
where Φ(·)∈Rninis the output of the second to last
layer of the FNN, the learned parameters consist of ϕ=
[ϕl, ϕw, ϕb,W], and the adaptable parameters consist of θ=
[θw, θb]. The learned ensemble weighting ϕw∈Rnwis
adapted by θwand the last layer bias ϕb∈Rnoutis adapted
byθb.
Remark 2. The dynamics (1) are a linear function of the
adaptable parameters θ.
Remark 3. The tensor Wis a set of basis functions, with
their weighting dynamically adjusted through adaptation of
θw.Algorithm 1 Online Adaptation
1:Input: starting step s, initial parameter covariance Ps
2:initialize t←s, θ0←0
3:while running do
4: ˆxt+1:t+h←Propagate dynamics (1) hsteps with θt
5: Ht+h←Compute multi-step Jacobian with (8)
6: ¯Pt+h←Pt+Q
7: St+h=C 
Ht+h¯Pt+hHT
t+h+R
CT
8: Kt+h←¯Pt+hHT
t+hCTS−1
t+h
9: θt+h←θt+γtKt+hC(xt+h−ˆxt+h)
10: Pt+h←¯Pt+h+Kt+hCHt+h¯Pt+h
11: t←t+h
B. Online Adaptation
Here, we present the online adaptation scheme (Algo-
rithm 1) implemented onboard the vehicle for dynamically up-
dating the adaptable parameters θ. We employ a Kalman filter
to quickly adapt the dynamics model to incoming measure-
ments since the adaptable parameters are linear with respect
to the dynamics (Remark 2). Propagation of the dynamics (1)
occurs at a very quick timescale; we run the Kalman filter
at a slower rate to improve parameter adaptation by adapting
parameters every htime steps. This allows us to mitigate the
impact of noisy and delayed state measurements, account for
the minimal changes in integrated quantities over single time
steps, and capture longer-term trends in parameter behavior.
To form the Kalman filter, we assume the following:
Assumption 1. The adaptable parameters evolve according
to a random walk: θt+h=θt+wθ
twithwθ
t∼ N(0, Q).
Assumption 2. Explicitly denoting the dependence on θ, we
assume the system dynamics have additive Gaussian noise:
xt+1=f(xt, ut, yt;θt) +wx
t, where wx
t∼ N(0, R).
With the notation at:t+h≜{at, at+1, . . . , a t+h}, where a
is any variable, we perform an h-step dynamics propagation
to obtain predicted states ˆxt+1:t+h. Since we propagate the
dynamics over multiple steps, we compute the multi-step
Jacobian Ht+h=∂ˆxt+h/∂θtwith the recursion:
Ht+i=Fx
t+iHt+i−1+Fθ
t+i
Ht=Fθ
t,(8)
where:
Fx
t+i=∂
∂xt+if(ˆxt+i, ut+i, yt+i;θt)and
Fθ
t+i=∂
∂θtf(ˆxt+i, ut+i, yt+i;θt).(9)
By performing a multi-step propagation, we include the dy-
namics Jacobian Fxin the multi-step Jacobian computation
(8). This Jacobian captures how the current state influences
future states, and its recursive incorporation over multiple steps
provides a richer, long-term understanding of how the adapted
parameters θinfluence the dynamics, improving the accuracy
of adaptation. We make the following assumption to simplify
computation of the multi-step Jacobian:
Assumption 3. Changes in the learned model output with
respect to changes in the state are negligible, i.e., ∂ζ/∂x ≈0.
We use the measurement selection matrix C∈R3×10in
Algorithm 1 to select only the velocity measurements vfor pa-
rameter updates. The position measurements pare disregarded
because the changes in position within a single Kalman filter
update are negligible compared to the measurement noise.
Additionally, zis excluded: propagation of the brake and
steering states does not depend on the adaptable parameters
θ, and the engine state is omitted to simplify the multi-step
Jacobian. With ˆxt+1:t+handHt+iavailable, we perform a
Kalman update with lines 6 to 10 of Algorithm 1. To prevent
unnecessary parameter updates while the vehicle is moving
very slowly, we scale the update in line 9 with:
γt=∥vt∥2
2
∥vt∥2
2+ε, (10)
where ε > 0adjusts the scaling intensity. The updated
parameters are then used with the controller (Section III-B)
for the next htime steps.
C. Offline Meta-learning
With the adaptation framework established, our goal is to
optimize the basis functions Wand the Kalman filter param-
eters Ps,Q,R, and εoffline to maximize the effectiveness
of online adaptation. This is achieved through a two-phase
process: first, a data collection phase to gather diverse and
representative trajectories, followed by a training phase to
refine the parameterization and basis functions.
1) Data Collection: We begin by collecting autonomous
driving data on a diverse set of terrains and conditions. Data
are collected in discrete runs, with each run defined as a
continuous period during which the robot is actively operating.
Each run is subsequently partitioned into potentially overlap-
ping trajectories, stored in dataset D, where each trajectory is
represented as {xt−τ:t+T, ut−τ:t+T, yt−τ:t+T}, encapsulating
the state, control inputs, and external inputs over a period of
τ+Ttime steps. Here, each trajectory will be associated to a
unique reference time t,τis the adaptation length, and Tis
the MPPI prediction length (Section III-B). Each trajectory is
short relative to the overall duration of the runs—on the order
of seconds. Consequently, individual trajectories are generally
limited to a single terrain type and a specific terrain condition,
providing focused and localized data.
2) Training: We perform offline training (Algorithm 2)
with gradient-based meta-learning [15], which consists of an
inner θadaptation phase and an outer loop which optimizes
ϕ,ψ Ps,Q,R, and ε(the tensor Wis reshaped as a vector
and contained within learned parameters ϕ). Given that each
trajectory typically occurs within a single terrain type and
condition, we make the following assumption:
Assumption 4. The true value of θis slowly time-varying, i.e.
approximately constant, for each trajectory.Algorithm 2 Offline Meta-Learning
1:Input: Dataset D
2:Output: Meta-learned parameters ϕ, ψ, P s, Q, R, ε
3:forNEepochs do
4: whileD ̸=∅do ▷iterate over entire dataset
5: Sample NBtrajectories from Dw/o replacement
6: foreach trajectory in batch do
7: θt←Run Algorithm 1 from t−τtot
8: Rollout dynamics (1) from ttot+Twithθt
9: Compute trajectory loss Lifrom ttot+T
10: foreach ξ∈ {ϕ, ψ, P s, Q, R}do
11: ξ←ξ−α∇ξPNB
i=1Li ▷optimizer step
For each sampled trajectory, with Assumption 4, we can
identify the adaptable parameters at the t-th time step, θt, by
running Algorithm 1 for a τ-step adaptation period from t−τ
tot.
Remark 4. During offline meta-learning, we introduce a
gradual decay to the adapted parameters with θt←βθt, β∈
(0,1). This slight modification to Algorithm 1 enhances train-
ing stability by preventing θfrom becoming excessively large,
particularly in the early stages of training when the Kalman
filter parameters remain uncalibrated.
Once adaptation is complete, θtand the dynamics model
(1) are used to generate a T-step dynamics prediction
(ˆxt+1:t+1+T). The i-th predicted trajectory is then evaluated
against the corresponding ground truth trajectory using the
multi-step loss function Li1:
Li=1
TTX
j=0∥ˆxt+1+j−xt+1+j∥2
2, (11)
where tis the reference time associated with the i-th trajectory.
Importantly, Liis indirectly a function of ϕ, ψ, P s, Q,R, and
ε, which enables meta-learning of these parameters through
backpropagation. During this process, gradients are propagated
through the entire procedure of Algorithm 1, allowing the
meta-learning framework to optimize both the adaptation
dynamics and the underlying Kalman filter parameters effec-
tively.
Remark 5. Since Wis optimized through the meta-learning
process, meta-learning effectively determines the “directions”
in the parameter space along which the Kalman filter can
adapt. In other words, it specifies the subset of parameters
that the Kalman filter targets for adaptation, guiding the
adaptation process to focus on the most relevant and impactful
aspects of the system’s dynamics.
Remark 6. During the meta-learning process, the covariance
matrices QandRare explicitly learned. These matrices play
a critical role in determining the Kalman filter’s time constant,
1For simplicity, we present the mean squared error (MSE) loss, however,
in practice, we use the negative log-likelihood (NLL) loss from [18]
A B C
D E FFig. 3: Forward facing camera stills from the dataset highlighting a diverse
range of terrains: A) flat sandy beach with a mixture of packed wet sand and
loose dry sand; B) wet dense mud that forms deep ruts; C) dirt trails with low
dry grass that weave through dense trees; D) mixed vegetation including dry,
dense vehicle-height grass; E) dense overgrown mixed vegetation ranging in
crushability; and F) loose gravel, uneven ground, and steep slopes.
TABLE I: Dataset statistics.
Mean Std Min 5th % Median 95th % Max
Fwd. vel. (m/s) 4.55 2.91 -2.79 -0.01 4.56 9.62 15.25
Lat. vel. (m/s) 0.02 0.20 -1.31 -0.32 0.00 0.37 1.34
Yaw rate (rad/s) 0.00 0.19 -1.32 -0.32 0.00 0.31 1.40
Pitch (deg) -0.4 4.9 -24.2 -8.0 -0.4 7.9 31.3
Roll (deg) 0.2 4.8 -28.7 -7.8 0.2 8.7 28.8
asQreflects the expected variability of the adaptable param-
eters, and Rencapsulates the process and measurement noise
in the dynamics model and state observations. Together, Qand
Rgovern how quickly the Kalman filter adapts θto changes
in the environment, directly influencing the responsiveness and
stability of the adaptation process.
V. E XPERIMENTS
We validate our approach through both real-world and
simulated experiments to investigate the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1. Meta-learned model adaptation reduces the
dynamics model’s prediction error during online operation.
Hypothesis 2. Effective model adaptation enhances closed-
loop behavior, improving both stability and safety.
A. Real-World Validation
1) Experimental Setup: We conducted real-world validation
of our approach on a full-scale autonomous off-road vehicle:
a modified Polaris RZR S4 1000 Turbo equipped with a
1.0Ltwin-cylinder engine, pictured in Fig. 1. The vehicle is
outfitted with an extensive suite of onboard computation and
sensors, including 2 LiDARs, 4 stereo/RGB cameras, IMUs,
GPS, and wheel encoders. State estimation is achieved using
a localization module that integrates LiDAR and IMU data
through a GTSAM-based Factor Graph Optimization (FGO)
framework [14, 36]. A 3D voxel map is constructed by fusing
geometric and semantic data to generate traversability and
elevation maps, providing track cost and ground slope [3]. The
vehicle is controlled via a power-assisted steering actuator, a
brake pressure pump, and electronic throttle control.
For offline meta-learning, we collected a dataset comprised
of approximately 1,700,000 trajectories ( 9.5hours) of au-tonomous driving that includes adverse weather conditions
like rain. Approximately 60% is from the Mojave Desert near
Helendale, CA; 30% from Halter Ranch near Paso Robles,
CA;10% from coastal sage near Oceanside, CA; and 5%from
coastal dunes also nearby Oceanside, CA. At these locations,
we collect data from a diverse range of terrains that are
depicted and described in Fig. 3. We also provide statistics
on key dataset quantities in Table I.
For each trajectory, we use an adaptation length of τ=
1,000 steps ( 20 s) and a prediction length of T= 250 steps
(5 s), with discrete time steps spaced ( 0.02 s) apart. Training
follows Algorithm 2 for NE= 20 epochs, starting with a
5-epoch pretraining phase without meta-learning (disabling
adaptation by setting θt= 0), followed by 15 epochs with
meta-learning enabled. For comparison, a baseline model was
also trained for 20 epochs on the exact same dataset without
meta-learning.
We perform online adaptation (Algorithm 1) at a rate of
5 Hz by updating every h= 10 time steps. For control,
MPPI (Section III-B) runs at 30 Hz , leveraging the most recent
set of adapted parameters θfor forward predictions. The car
completes 3 laps around a figure-8 track with additional curves
added to increase planning difficulty (see Fig. 1). We test the
Baseline (no adaptation) andMeta-adaptation (ours)
configurations for 4 repeated runs each.
To evaluate Hypothesis 1, we calculate the average model
prediction error over each run, defined as the Euclidean
distance between the endpoints of the predicted and actual
trajectories. For performance assessment (Hypothesis 2), we
log the completion time and average speed of each run. Safety
(Hypothesis 2) is analyzed by tracking the number of instances
the car exceeds safety limits, the duration spent outside these
limits, and the associated cost for both track boundary and
rollover ratio limit violations.
2) Results: Figure 4 compares trajectories for the Baseline
(no adaptation) andMeta-adaptation (ours) configura-
tions and Fig. 1 shows video stills capturing the adaptation
configuration in action. The Baseline (no adaptation) con-
figuration results in erratic behavior, with frequent violations
of track boundaries and rollover constraints. In contrast, the
Meta-adaptation (ours) configuration yields more stable
and compliant motion, as the dynamics model is adapted in
real-time (Fig. 5).
The quantitative results in Table II further support the advan-
tages of adaptation. The adapted model achieves significantly
lower prediction error, confirming that online adaptation ef-
fectively learns the terrain dynamics, validating Hypothesis 1.
Importantly, the Meta-adaptation (ours) configuration not
only improves performance—achieving faster track comple-
tion times and higher average speeds—but also enhances
safety metrics. Specifically, the adapted vehicle crosses safety
limits (e.g., track boundaries and rollover thresholds) far less
frequently and spends significantly less time in unsafe states
compared to the baseline. These improvements translate to a
dramatic reduction in associated track and rollover costs, high-
lighting the effectiveness of the adaptation method, confirming
TABLE II: Real-world validation results. The means and standard deviations over 4 runs of each configuration are displayed.
Completion Average Prediction # times crossed limit Time exceeds limit, s Cost (×104)
time, s speed, m s−1Error, m Track Rollover Track Rollover Track Rollover
Baseline (no adaptation) 154.6±16.9 5.06 ±0.58 4.88 ±0.47 8.0 ±1.8 13 ±5.4 5.32 ±1.81 6.64 ±2.09 40.8 20.2
Meta-adaptation (ours) 130.9±7.8 5.84 ±0.33 3.10 ±0.18 3.3 ±2.1 3.8 ±1.7 0.57 ±0.53 0.85 ±0.59 1.95 0.36
Baseline (no adaptation) Meta -adaptation (ours)
Path of vehicle Rollover limit exceeded
Fig. 4: Trajectories for all 3-lap real-world runs. The baseline configuration exhibits erratic motion, frequently violating course boundaries and rollover
limits. In contrast, our adaptation configuration produces more deliberate and compliant trajectories, as the vehicle learns the terrain dynamics in real time.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Time (sec)0.00.51.01.52.0||||2
Fig. 5: Norm of the adapted parameters during one of the real-world runs.
Hypothesis 2.
In high-speed off-road driving, an inaccurate dynamics
model can lead MPPI to generate unsafe trajectories that fail
to account for real-world dynamics. By incorporating accu-
rate, environment-adapted predictions, our adaptation method
enables MPPI to generate control sequences that balance per-
formance and safety. These results underscore the importance
of real-time model adaptation in ensuring both reliable and
secure autonomous vehicle operation in challenging terrains.
B. Simulated Experiments
We perform extensive simulated experiments to further
confirm our hypotheses.
1) Experimental Setup: The simulated experiments use
the same baseline and meta-learned models trained for thereal-world validation (Section V-A1) and identical adaptation
parameters. However, the physics simulator employs distinct
dynamics based on the bicycle model, creating a real2sim
transfer scenario where adaptation must account for the dy-
namics mismatch between the real-world training data and
the simulated environment. We procedurally generate four
diverse maps (Fig. 6), each with unique terrain and obstacle
configurations. The maps are categorized as shallow-sparse ,
shallow-dense ,steep-sparse , and steep-dense , where the first
term denotes the steepness of terrain features, and the second
describes the density of obstacles. This variety ensures that
the simulated environment tests the adaptation across a wide
range of scenarios.
Everything else remains consistent with the real-world
validation, except for a few key modifications. First, since
the maps are open with sufficiently distant boundaries, track
costs are omitted from the analysis. Next, we evaluate two
new configurations: Adaptation and Sliding LSQ . In the
Adaptation configuration, online adaptation is applied to the
baseline model to assess the impact of not meta-learning the
basis functions and Kalman filter parameters. For the Sliding
LSQ configuration, we implement the method of adaptation
from [34], which consists of using sliding-window regularized
least squares to adapt the weights of an ensemble model in real
time. To ensure statistical significance, we perform 25 runs per
TABLE III: Results of the simulated experiments. The means over 25 runs of each configuration are displayed.
Completion time, s Average speed, m s−1Prediction Error, m
Steepness shallow shallow steep steep shallow shallow steep steep shallow shallow steep steep
Obstacle Density sparse dense sparse dense sparse dense sparse dense sparse dense sparse dense
Baseline (no adaptation) 39.2 44.4 73.0*86.2*5.88*5.32 4.06*3.59*7.19 7.62 8.17 9.03
Sliding LSQ 46.7 46.6 87.7 102.0 5.04 5.06 3.43 3.06 5.71 5.00 5.21 5.35
Adaptation 40.4 43.1*83.0 95.3 5.70 5.47*3.59 3.15 4.54 4.45 4.25 4.64
Meta-adaptation (ours) 40.1 44.7 88.8 105.9 5.75 5.27 3.34 2.99 2.96*2.19*3.67*4.65
# times over rollover limit Time exceeding rollover limit, s Rollover Cost ( ×104)
Baseline (no adaptation) 2.7 3.6 5.4 9.9 1.30 5.31 5.09 7.50 1.09 1.75 1.82 8.91
Sliding LSQ 2.5 4.1 5.4 7.1 2.19 6.12 4.24 5.53 1.19 2.00 4.23 8.59
Adaptation 2.9 4.6 4.7 6.7 1.47 7.10 5.71 5.42 1.04 2.49 1.14 2.75
Meta-adaptation (ours) 1.9 5.3 3.2*6.2 0.97 4.83 3.88 3.40*0.99 1.15*0.83 2.57
*Significant best result: bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals of the mean do not overlap with those of any other configuration.
Fig. 6: Procedurally generated maps for the simulated experiments;
horizontal and vertical axes are in meters.
configuration on each map.
2) Results: The results of the simulated experiments are
summarized in Table III. As expected, prediction errors in
simulation are generally higher than in real-world testing due
to the real2sim gap. Nevertheless, all adaptation configurations
outperform the baseline in prediction accuracy, with the meta-
learned adaptation mostly achieving the lowest prediction
errors, further confirming Hypothesis 1.
In terms of performance, the baseline configuration gen-
erally achieves shorter completion times and higher aver-
age speeds. However, this comes at the cost of compro-
mised safety, with the baseline configuration exhibiting higher
rollover occurrences, longer time spent exceeding limits, and
increased safety costs. In contrast, the adaptation configura-
tions demonstrate significantly improved safety, with the meta-learned configuration generally achieving the greatest reduc-
tions across all safety metrics. These findings align with the
real-world validation results, further supporting Hypothesis 2.
Crucially, the comparison between our meta-learned con-
figuration and the non-meta-learned adaptation configurations,
Adaptation andSliding LSQ , highlights the importance of
meta-learning. Our configuration generally outperforms in pre-
diction error and safety metrics across all map types. The non-
meta-learned configurations rely on suboptimally selected ba-
sis functions, and the Sliding LSQ configuration requires hand
tuning of the window length and regularization parameter—
directly influencing the adaptation rate. In contrast, our method
learns both the basis functions and adaptation dynamics from
data, resulting in models that adapt more effectively, yield
better closed-loop performance, and bridge the substantial
dynamics mismatch from the real2sim gap.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced a meta-learning framework for
online dynamics model adaptation applied to high-speed off-
road autonomous driving. By combining a Kalman filter-based
adaptation scheme with meta-learned parameters, our approach
addresses the challenges of unseen or evolving terrain dynam-
ics, enhancing prediction accuracy, performance, and safety.
Empirical validation through real-world and simulated experi-
ments demonstrates that our method outperforms baseline and
non-meta-learned adaptation strategies, particularly in safety-
critical scenarios. Our method is applicable to a broad range
of model-based control scenarios beyond off-road autonomous
driving, as it can be integrated with any model that is linear
in its adaptable parameters and any MPC-type controller.
This contribution represents a step toward more robust and
reliable autonomous systems capable of adapting to complex
and changing environments.
A. Limitations
While our approach demonstrates significant improvements
in prediction accuracy and safety, several limitations remain.
The initial selection of Kalman filter parameters is still user-
defined, which could lead to unstable training if poorly chosen.
Another key challenge is the method’s reliance on sufficiently
exciting inputs to effectively identify the adapted parameters.
For instance, driving straight on flat terrain may not produce
enough variability for meaningful adaptation. Future work
could explore active exploration strategies to ensure effective
parameter identification. Finally, the computational overhead
during meta-learning is another consideration, as taking gra-
dients through the adaptation process increases memory us-
age and training time. To address this, future work could
investigate techniques to limit gradient propagation through
only a subset of parameters, such as ϕl, reducing resource
requirements.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Trey Smith and Brian Coltin
for their helpful insights and feedback. The research was car-
ried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute
of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (80NM0018D0004). This work was
supported by a NASA Space Technology Graduate Research
Opportunity under award 80NSSC23K1192, by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. 2409535, and by Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). Approved for
Public Release, Distribution Unlimited. ©2025. All rights
reserved.
REFERENCES
[1] Sina Aghli and Christoffer Heckman. Online system
identification and calibration of dynamic models for
autonomous ground vehicles. In 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages
4933–4939. IEEE, 2018.
[2] Anelia Angelova, Larry Matthies, Daniel Helmick, and
Pietro Perona. Learning and prediction of slip from visual
information. Journal of Field Robotics , 24(3):205–231,
2007.
[3] Deegan Atha, Xianmei Lei, Shehryar Khattak, Anna
Sabel, Elle Miller, Aurelio Noca, Grace Lim, Jeffrey
Edlund, Curtis Padgett, and Patrick Spieler. Few-shot
semantic learning for robust multi-biome 3d seman-
tic mapping in off-road environments. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.06632 , 2024.
[4] Tabish Badar, Juha Backman, and Arto Visala. Vehicle
modeling and state estimation for autonomous driving in
terrain. Control Engineering Practice , 152:106046, 2024.
[5] Somrita Banerjee, James Harrison, P Michael Furlong,
and Marco Pavone. Adaptive meta-learning for iden-
tification of rover-terrain dynamics. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.10191 , 2020.
[6] Gourav Bathla, Kishor Bhadane, Rahul Kumar Singh,
Rajneesh Kumar, Rajanikanth Aluvalu, Rajalakshmi Kr-
ishnamurthi, Adarsh Kumar, RN Thakur, and Shakila
Basheer. Autonomous vehicles and intelligent automa-
tion: Applications, challenges, and opportunities. Mobile
Information Systems , 2022(1):7632892, 2022.
[7] Suneel Belkhale, Rachel Li, Gregory Kahn, Rowan
McAllister, Roberto Calandra, and Sergey Levine.
Model-based meta-reinforcement learning for flight withsuspended payloads. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters , 6(2):1471–1478, 2021.
[8] Xiaoyi Cai, Michael Everett, Jonathan Fink, and
Jonathan P How. Risk-aware off-road navigation via a
learned speed distribution map. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS) , pages 2931–2937. IEEE, 2022.
[9] Xiaoyi Cai, Michael Everett, Lakshay Sharma, Philip R
Osteen, and Jonathan P How. Probabilistic traversability
model for risk-aware motion planning in off-road envi-
ronments. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 11297–
11304. IEEE, 2023.
[10] Edsger W Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connexion
with graphs. Numerische mathematik , 1(1):269–271,
1959.
[11] Onur Dikici, Edoardo Ghignone, Cheng Hu, Nicolas
Baumann, Lei Xie, Andrea Carron, Michele Magno,
and Matteo Corno. Learning-based on-track system
identification for scaled autonomous racing in under a
minute. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.17508 , 2024.
[12] Franck Djeumou, Cyrus Neary, Eric Goubault, Sylvie
Putot, and Ufuk Topcu. Neural networks with physics-
informed architectures and constraints for dynamical sys-
tems modeling. In Learning for Dynamics and Control
Conference , pages 263–277. PMLR, 2022.
[13] Franck Djeumou, Jonathan YM Goh, Ufuk Topcu, and
Avinash Balachandran. Autonomous drifting with 3
minutes of data via learned tire models. In 2023 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA) , pages 968–974. IEEE, 2023.
[14] Seyed Fakoorian, Kyohei Otsu, Shehryar Khattak, Matteo
Palieri, and Ali-akbar Agha-mohammadi. Rose: Robust
state estimation via online covariance adaption. In The
International Symposium of Robotics Research , pages
452–467. Springer, 2022.
[15] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-
agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep net-
works. In International conference on machine learning ,
pages 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
[16] Jason Gibson, Bogdan Vlahov, David Fan, Patrick
Spieler, Daniel Pastor, Ali-akbar Agha-mohammadi, and
Evangelos A Theodorou. A multi-step dynamics mod-
eling framework for autonomous driving in multiple
environments. In 2023 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 7959–7965.
IEEE, 2023.
[17] Jason Gibson, Anoushka Alavilli, Erica Tevere, Evan-
gelos A Theodorou, and Patrick Spieler. Dynam-
ics modeling using visual terrain features for high-
speed autonomous off-road driving. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.00581 , 2024.
[18] Jason Gibson, Bogdan Vlahov, Patrick Spieler, and Evan-
gelos A Theodorou. Multistep belief space dynamics
learning for risk-aware control. arXiv preprint , 2025.
[19] Tyler Han, Alex Liu, Anqi Li, Alex Spitzer, Guanya
Shi, and Byron Boots. Model predictive control for
aggressive driving over uneven terrain. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.12284 , 2023.
[20] James Harrison, Apoorva Sharma, Chelsea Finn, and
Marco Pavone. Continuous meta-learning without tasks.
Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:
17571–17581, 2020.
[21] James Harrison, Apoorva Sharma, and Marco Pavone.
Meta-learning priors for efficient online bayesian re-
gression. In Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics XIII:
Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on the Algorithmic
Foundations of Robotics 13 , pages 318–337. Springer,
2020.
[22] Karl D Iagnemma and Steven Dubowsky. Terrain esti-
mation for high-speed rough-terrain autonomous vehicle
navigation. In Unmanned Ground Vehicle Technology IV ,
volume 4715, pages 256–266. SPIE, 2002.
[23] Petros A Ioannou and Jing Sun. Robust adaptive control .
Courier Corporation, 2012.
[24] Subhan Khan and Jose Guivant. Fast nonlinear model
predictive planner and control for an unmanned ground
vehicle in the presence of disturbances and dynamic
obstacles. Scientific Reports , 12(1):12135, 2022.
[25] Taekyung Kim, Hojin Lee, and Wonsuk Lee. Physics
embedded neural network vehicle model and applications
in risk-aware autonomous driving using latent features. In
2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 4182–4189. IEEE,
2022.
[26] Geert-Jan M Kruijff, Fiora Pirri, Mario Gianni, Panagi-
otis Papadakis, Matia Pizzoli, Arnab Sinha, Viatcheslav
Tretyakov, Thorsten Linder, Emanuele Pianese, Salvatore
Corrao, et al. Rescue robots at earthquake-hit mirandola,
italy: A field report. In 2012 IEEE international sym-
posium on safety, security, and rescue robotics (SSRR) ,
pages 1–8. IEEE, 2012.
[27] Ivana Kruijff-Korbayov ´a, Luigi Freda, Mario Gianni,
Valsamis Ntouskos, V ´aclav Hlav ´aˇc, Vladim ´ır Kubelka,
Erik Zimmermann, Hartmut Surmann, Kresimir Dulic,
Wolfgang Rottner, et al. Deployment of ground and
aerial robots in earthquake-struck amatrice in italy (brief
report). In 2016 IEEE international symposium on safety,
security, and rescue robotics (SSRR) , pages 278–279.
IEEE, 2016.
[28] Hojin Lee, Taekyung Kim, Jungwi Mun, and Wonsuk
Lee. Learning terrain-aware kinodynamic model for
autonomous off-road rally driving with model predictive
path integral control. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters , 2023.
[29] Jooyong Lee and Kara M Kockelman. Strategic evacua-
tion for hurricanes and regional events with and without
autonomous vehicles. Transportation research record ,
2675(9):1398–1409, 2021.
[30] Jacob Levy, Tyler Westenbroek, and David Fridovich-
Keil. Learning to walk from three minutes of real-
world data with semi-structured dynamics models. In8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2024.
[31] Cuauht ´emoc Acosta L ´ua, Domenico Bianchi, and Stefano
Di Gennaro. Nonlinear observer-based adaptive control
of ground vehicles with uncertainty estimation. Journal
of the Franklin Institute , 360(18):14175–14189, 2023.
[32] Elena Sorina Lupu, Fengze Xie, James A Preiss, Jedidiah
Alindogan, Matthew Anderson, and Soon-Jo Chung.
MAGIC-VFM-meta-learning adaptation for ground in-
teraction control with visual foundation models. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics , 2024.
[33] Xiangyun Meng, Nathan Hatch, Alexander Lam-
bert, Anqi Li, Nolan Wagener, Matthew Schmittle,
JoonHo Lee, Wentao Yuan, Zoey Chen, Samuel Deng,
et al. Terrainnet: Visual modeling of complex terrain
for high-speed, off-road navigation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.15771 , 2023.
[34] Tom ´aˇs Nagy, Ahmad Amine, Truong X Nghiem, Ugo
Rosolia, Zirui Zang, and Rahul Mangharam. Ensemble
gaussian processes for adaptive autonomous driving on
multi-friction surfaces. IFAC-PapersOnLine , 56(2):494–
500, 2023.
[35] Issa AD Nesnas, Lorraine M Fesq, and Richard A V olpe.
Autonomy for space robots: Past, present, and future.
Current Robotics Reports , 2(3):251–263, 2021.
[36] Julian Nubert, Shehryar Khattak, and Marco Hutter.
Graph-based multi-sensor fusion for consistent local-
ization of autonomous construction robots. In 2022
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA) , pages 10048–10054. IEEE, 2022.
[37] Michael O’Connell, Guanya Shi, Xichen Shi, Kamyar
Azizzadenesheli, Anima Anandkumar, Yisong Yue, and
Soon-Jo Chung. Neural-fly enables rapid learning for
agile flight in strong winds. Science Robotics , 7(66):
eabm6597, 2022.
[38] Anuj Pokhrel, Aniket Datar, Mohammad Nazeri, and
Xuesu Xiao. Cahsor: Competence-aware high-speed
off-road ground navigation in se (3). arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.07065 , 2024.
[39] Spencer M Richards, Navid Azizan, Jean-Jacques Slo-
tine, and Marco Pavone. Control-oriented meta-learning.
The International Journal of Robotics Research , 42(10):
777–797, 2023.
[40] Forrest Rogers-Marcovitz, Neal Seegmiller, and Alonzo
Kelly. Continuous vehicle slip model identification on
changing terrains. In RSS 2012 Workshop on Long-term
Operation of Autonomous Robotic Systems in Changing
Environments , 2012.
[41] Hersh Sanghvi, Spencer Folk, and Camillo Jose Taylor.
Occam: Online continuous controller adaptation with
meta-learned models. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot
Learning , 2024.
[42] Junwon Seo, Taekyung Kim, Seongyong Ahn, and
Kiho Kwak. Metaverse: Meta-learning traversabil-
ity cost map for off-road navigation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.13991 , 2023.
[43] Guanya Shi, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Michael
O’Connell, Soon-Jo Chung, and Yisong Yue. Meta-
adaptive nonlinear control: Theory and algorithms.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
34:10013–10025, 2021.
[44] Mohammed Yousri Silaa, Aissa Bencherif, and Oscar
Barambones. Indirect adaptive control using neural
network and discrete extended kalman filter for wheeled
mobile robot. In Actuators , volume 13, page 51. MDPI,
2024.
[45] Xingyou Song, Yuxiang Yang, Krzysztof Choromanski,
Ken Caluwaerts, Wenbo Gao, Chelsea Finn, and Jie Tan.
Rapidly adaptable legged robots via evolutionary meta-
learning. in 2020 ieee. In RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 3769–
3776, 2020.
[46] Vandi Verma, Mark W Maimone, Daniel M Gaines,
Raymond Francis, Tara A Estlin, Stephen R Kuhn,
Gregg R Rabideau, Steve A Chien, Michael M McHenry,
Evan J Graser, et al. Autonomous robotics is driving
perseverance rover’s progress on mars. Science Robotics ,
8(80):eadi3099, 2023.
[47] Marco Visca, Roger Powell, Yang Gao, and Saber Fal-
lah. Deep meta-learning energy-aware path planner for
unmanned ground vehicles in unknown terrains. IEEE
access , 10:30055–30068, 2022.
[48] Bogdan Vlahov, Jason Gibson, David D Fan, Patrick
Spieler, Ali-akbar Agha-mohammadi, and Evangelos A
Theodorou. Low frequency sampling in model predictive
path integral control. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters , 2024.
[49] Sean J Wang, Honghao Zhu, and Aaron M Johnson. Pay
attention to how you drive: Safe and adaptive model-
based reinforcement learning for off-road driving. In
2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) , pages 16954–16960. IEEE, 2024.
[50] Grady Williams, Paul Drews, Brian Goldfain, James M
Rehg, and Evangelos A Theodorou. Aggressive driving
with model predictive path integral control. In 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA) , pages 1433–1440. IEEE, 2016.
[51] Wenli Xiao, Tairan He, John Dolan, and Guanya Shi.
Safe deep policy adaptation. In 2024 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages
17286–17292. IEEE, 2024.
[52] Wenhao Yu, Jie Tan, Yunfei Bai, Erwin Coumans, and
Sehoon Ha. Learning fast adaptation with meta strategy
optimization. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 5
(2):2950–2957, 2020.